This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **
Produced by World Library, Inc., from their Library of the Future
This is the 100th Etext file presented by Project Gutenberg, and
is presented in cooperation with World Library, Inc., from their
Library of the Future and Shakespeare CDROMS.  Project Gutenberg
often releases Etexts that are NOT placed in the Public Domain!!
in the presentation of The Complete Works of William Shakespeare
Since unlike many other Project Gutenberg-tm etexts, this etext
is copyright protected, and since the materials and methods you
use will effect the Project's reputation, your right to copy and
distribute it is limited by the copyright and other laws, and by
the conditions of this "Small Print!" statement.
  B) This license is subject to the conditions that you honor
the refund and replacement provisions of this "small print!"
  *not* contain characters other than those intended by the
  author of the work, although tilde (~), asterisk (*) and
  intended by the author, and additional characters may be used
    (2) The etext is readily convertible by the reader at no
  expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent form by the
  program that displays the etext (as is the case, for instance,
  additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the etext in plain
This etext may contain a "Defect" in the form of incomplete,
other infringement, a defective or damaged disk, computer virus,
for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below, the
Project (and any other party you may receive this etext from as
ing it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid
for it by sending an explanatory note within that time to the
implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of consequen-
tial damages, so the above disclaimers and exclusions may not
apply to you, and you may have other legal rights.
3.  INDEMNITY: You will indemnify and hold the Project, its
directly or indirectly from any of the following that you do or
modification, or addition to the etext, or [C] any Defect.
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
  That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
  But as the riper should by time decease,
  Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,
  And only herald to the gaudy spring,
    Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
    To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.
  Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
  Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest,
  Now is the time that face should form another,
  Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
  Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
  Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
  Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
  Calls back the lovely April of her prime,
    Die single and thine image dies with thee.
  The bounteous largess given thee to give?
  Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
    Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
  Will play the tyrants to the very same,
  To hideous winter and confounds him there,
    But flowers distilled though they with winter meet,
    Leese but their show, their substance still lives sweet.
  In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled:
  Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
  That's for thy self to breed another thee,
  If ten of thine ten times refigured thee:
  Leaving thee living in posterity?
  Lo in the orient when the gracious light
  And having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill,
  Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
  From his low tract and look another way:
  If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
  They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
  In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear:
  Mark how one string sweet husband to another,
  Resembling sire, and child, and happy mother,
    Sings this to thee, 'Thou single wilt prove none'.
  The world will wail thee like a makeless wife,
  That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
  Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend
  Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
  But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
  And kept unused the user so destroys it:
    No love toward others in that bosom sits
    Make thee another self for love of me,
    That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
  If all were minded so, the times should cease,
  And threescore year would make the world away:
  Look whom she best endowed, she gave thee more;
    She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
  When I do count the clock that tells the time,
  And see the brave day sunk in hideous night,
  When I behold the violet past prime,
  Which erst from heat did canopy the herd
  Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard:
  That thou among the wastes of time must go,
  Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake,
  And die as fast as they see others grow,
    And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
    Save breed to brave him, when he takes thee hence.
  And your sweet semblance to some other give.
  Find no determination, then you were
  Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
    You had a father, let your son say so.
  Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck,
  And constant stars in them I read such art
  As truth and beauty shall together thrive
    Or else of thee this I prognosticate,
  Whereon the stars in secret influence comment.
  Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky:
  Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
  And wear their brave state out of memory.
  Then the conceit of this inconstant stay,
  Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
  So should the lines of life that life repair
  Neither in inward worth nor outward fair
  If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
  So should my papers (yellowed with their age)
  Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
  Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
  Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
    So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
    So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
  Devouring Time blunt thou the lion's paws,
  And make the earth devour her own sweet brood,
  Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
  And burn the long-lived phoenix, in her blood,
  To the wide world and all her fading sweets:
  But I forbid thee one most heinous crime,
  Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen,
  Hast thou the master mistress of my passion,
  An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling:
  Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth,
  Till nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting,
  And by addition me of thee defeated,
    But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure,
    Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.
  And then believe me, my love is as fair,
  As any mother's child, though not so bright
    Let them say more that like of hearsay well,
  But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
  For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
  Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
  How can I then be elder than thou art?
  O therefore love be of thyself so wary,
  As I not for my self, but for thee will,
  As an unperfect actor on the stage,
  O'ercharged with burthen of mine own love's might:
  O let my looks be then the eloquence,
  Mine eye hath played the painter and hath stelled,
  My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
  For through the painter must you see his skill,
  Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
  Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
    Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
    They draw but what they see, know not the heart.
  Let those who are in favour with their stars,
  Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread,
  But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
  And in themselves their pride lies buried,
  For at a frown they in their glory die.
  Is from the book of honour razed quite,
  And all the rest forgot for which he toiled:
  To thee I send this written embassage
    Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee,
    Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
  But then begins a journey in my head
  For then my thoughts (from far where I abide)
  Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
  Looking on darkness which the blind do see.
    For thee, and for my self, no quiet find.
  How can I then return in happy plight
  That am debarred the benefit of rest?
  And each (though enemies to either's reign)
  The one by toil, the other to complain
  How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
  I tell the day to please him thou art bright,
  And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
  So flatter I the swart-complexioned night,
  When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
  Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
  Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
  (Like to the lark at break of day arising
    That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
  When to the sessions of sweet silent thought,
  I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
    But if the while I think on thee (dear friend)
  And there reigns love and all love's loving parts,
  As interest of the dead, which now appear,
  But things removed that hidden in thee lie.
  Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
  Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
  Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
    Their images I loved, I view in thee,
    And thou (all they) hast all the all of me.
  Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
  And though they be outstripped by every pen,
  Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
  Exceeded by the height of happier men.
  O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought,
    Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.
  Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
  Kissing with golden face the meadows green;
  Anon permit the basest clouds to ride,
  And from the forlorn world his visage hide
    Suns of the world may stain, when heaven's sun staineth.
  Hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke?
  'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
  To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
  That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
  Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss,
  To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
    And they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds.
  In our two loves there is but one respect,
  I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
  Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
    But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
  As a decrepit father takes delight,
  For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
  Or any of these all, or all, or more
  So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,
    Look what is best, that best I wish in thee,
    This wish I have, then ten times happy me.
  While thou dost breathe that pour'st into my verse,
  O give thy self the thanks if aught in me,
  For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
  Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
  And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
    If my slight muse do please these curious days,
    The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
  When thou art all the better part of me?
  And what is't but mine own when I praise thee?
  That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone:
  To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
  Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all,
  What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
  I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest,
  Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
  Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
  Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed.
  Who lead thee in their riot even there
    Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
  If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
  Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
    But here's the joy, my friend and I are one,
    Sweet flattery, then she loves but me alone.
  When most I wink then do mine eyes best see,
  For all the day they view things unrespected,
  But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
  To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
  By looking on thee in the living day,
    All days are nights to see till I see thee,
    And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
  If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
  For then despite of space I would be brought,
  No matter then although my foot did stand
  Upon the farthest earth removed from thee,
  As soon as think the place where he would be.
    But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.
  The other two, slight air, and purging fire,
  Are both with thee, wherever I abide,
  The first my thought, the other my desire,
  For when these quicker elements are gone
  In tender embassy of love to thee,
  By those swift messengers returned from thee,
    This told, I joy, but then no longer glad,
    I send them back again and straight grow sad.
  How to divide the conquest of thy sight,
  My heart, mine eye the freedom of that right,
  But the defendant doth that plea deny,
  A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,
  And by their verdict is determined
  The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part.
  And each doth good turns now unto the other,
  Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother;
  With my love's picture then my eye doth feast,
  And to the painted banquet bids my heart:
  Another time mine eye is my heart's guest,
  So either by thy picture or my love,
  For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
  And I am still with them, and they with thee.
    Or if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
  Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
  Within the gentle closure of my breast,
    And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear,
  When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
  When love converted from the thing it was
  Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
  To guard the lawful reasons on thy part,
    To leave poor me, thou hast the strength of laws,
  How heavy do I journey on the way,
  'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend.'
  As if by some instinct the wretch did know
  His rider loved not speed being made from thee:
  Thus can my love excuse the slow offence,
  Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed,
  From where thou art, why should I haste me thence?
  O what excuse will my poor beast then find,
  Then should I spur though mounted on the wind,
    Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
    Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.
  So am I as the rich whose blessed key,
  For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
  Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
  Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
  So is the time that keeps you as my chest
  Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
  Describe Adonis and the counterfeit,
  Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
  The other as your bounty doth appear,
  As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
  When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
  But for their virtue only is their show,
  Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so,
  Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made:
  Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
  But you shall shine more bright in these contents
  And broils root out the work of masonry,
  Even in the eyes of all posterity
  That wear this world out to the ending doom.
    So till the judgment that your self arise,
  Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
  Let this sad interim like the ocean be
  Which parts the shore, where two contracted new,
  Come daily to the banks, that when they see:
  Return of love, more blest may be the view.
  Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
  Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
  Whilst I (my sovereign) watch the clock for you,
  Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
  If there be nothing new, but that which is,
  The second burthen of a former child!
  Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
  That I might see what the old world could say,
  Whether we are mended, or whether better they,
  Or whether revolution be the same.
    O sure I am the wits of former days,
  Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
  So do our minutes hasten to their end,
  Nativity once in the main of light,
  Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth,
  And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
  Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
  And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.
  My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
  While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
  Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
  To play the watchman ever for thy sake.
    For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
    From me far off, with others all too near.
  And for this sin there is no remedy,
  As I all other in all worths surmount.
    'Tis thee (my self) that for my self I praise,
  Stealing away the treasure of his spring:
    His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
    And they shall live, and he in them still green.
  When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
  Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
  And the firm soil win of the watery main,
  But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
  Against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days,
  Tired with all these for restful death I cry,
    Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
    In days long since, before these last so bad.
  Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
  Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
  Before the golden tresses of the dead,
  Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:
  Making no summer of another's green,
  Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view,
  Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:
  All tongues (the voice of souls) give thee that due,
  But those same tongues that give thee so thine own,
  In other accents do this praise confound
  By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
  They look into the beauty of thy mind,
  And that in guess they measure by thy deeds,
  Then churls their thoughts (although their eyes were kind)
  To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
  For slander's mark was ever yet the fair,
  Thy worth the greater being wooed of time,
  For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
  Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days,
  Either not assailed, or victor being charged,
  Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
  Give warning to the world that I am fled
  If thinking on me then should make you woe.
    Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
  O lest the world should task you to recite,
  Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
  Bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
  In me thou seest the twilight of such day,
  As after sunset fadeth in the west,
  In me thou seest the glowing of such fire,
  That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
  As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
  Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
  The very part was consecrate to thee,
  My spirit is thine the better part of me,
  So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
  Too base of thee to be remembered,
    And that is this, and this with thee remains.
  Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground;
  And for the peace of you I hold such strife
  Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,
  Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure,
  Why with the time do I not glance aside
  Why write I still all one, ever the same,
  Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
    For as the sun is daily new and old,
  Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
  Of mouthed graves will give thee memory,
  Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
    Shall profit thee, and much enrich thy book.
  So oft have I invoked thee for my muse,
  And under thee their poesy disperse.
  Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing,
  Have added feathers to the learned's wing,
  Whose influence is thine, and born of thee,
  In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
  And my sick muse doth give an other place.
  Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
  Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent,
  He robs thee of, and pays it thee again,
  He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word,
  No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
    Since what he owes thee, thou thy self dost pay.
  And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
  But since your worth (wide as the ocean is)
  The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
  Though I (once gone) to all the world must die,
  When all the breathers of this world are dead,
    Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.
  And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
  Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
  And therefore art enforced to seek anew,
  Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
  And do so love, yet when they have devised,
    And their gross painting might be better used,
    Where cheeks need blood, in thee it is abused.
  And therefore to your fair no painting set,
  And therefore have I slept in your report,
  When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
  In whose confine immured is the store,
  Reserve their character with golden quill,
  And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
  I think good thoughts, whilst other write good words,
  And to the most of praise add something more,
    Then others, for the breath of words respect,
  Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
  Bound for the prize of (all too precious) you,
  Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
  No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
  I was not sick of any fear from thence.
  The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing:
  My bonds in thee are all determinate.
  For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
  Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
    Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter,
  And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
  And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn:
  For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
  Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
    Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
    For thee, against my self I'll vow debate,
  Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
  join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
  Come in the rearward of a conquered woe,
  When other petty griefs have done their spite,
  But in the onset come, so shall I taste
  At first the very worst of fortune's might.
    And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
    Compared with loss of thee, will not seem so.
  Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
  Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
  Some in their garments though new-fangled ill:
  Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse.
  Wherein it finds a joy above the rest,
  But these particulars are not my measure,
  All these I better in one general best.
  And having thee, of all men's pride I boast.
  Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
  When in the least of them my life hath end,
  Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.
  For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
  In many's looks, the false heart's history
  Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
  That do not do the thing, they most do show,
  Who moving others, are themselves as stone,
  Tibey are the lords and owners of their faces,
  Others, but stewards of their excellence:
  The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
    For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds,
  How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame,
  Which like a canker in the fragrant rose,
  Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
  That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
  Which for their habitation chose out thee,
  Thou mak'st faults graces, that to thee resort:
  As on the finger of a throned queen,
  So are those errors that in thee are seen,
  How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
  if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
    But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
  From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
  Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
  Like widowed wombs after their lords' decease:
  But hope of orphans, and unfathered fruit,
  For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
  And thou away, the very birds are mute.
    Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
    That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
  From you have I been absent in the spring,
  Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
  Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
  Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
  Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose,
    As with your shadow I with these did play.
  One blushing shame, another white despair:
  But for his theft in pride of all his growth
    But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee.
  To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
  Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem,
  If time have any wrinkle graven there,
    So thou prevent'st his scythe, and crooked knife.
  So dost thou too, and therein dignified:
  Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee,
    Then do thy office Muse, I teach thee how,
  My love is strengthened though more weak in seeming,
  I love not less, though less the show appear,
  Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
  Not that the summer is less pleasant now
  Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
  But that wild music burthens every bough,
  And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
  Look in your glass and there appears a face,
  Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
  To mar the subject that before was well?
  For to no other pass my verses tend,
  Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
  In process of the seasons have I seen,
  Fair, kind, and true, varying to other words,
  Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
  When in the chronicle of wasted time,
  I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
  Then in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
  I see their antique pen would have expressed,
  So all their praises are but prophecies
  And for they looked but with divining eyes,
    For we which now behold these present days,
  Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul,
  Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come,
  Can yet the lease of my true love control,
  And the sad augurs mock their own presage,
  Incertainties now crown themselves assured,
  Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
  What's in the brain that ink may character,
  Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit,
  I must each day say o'er the very same,
  Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
    Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
  Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
  Alas 'tis true, I have gone here and there,
  And made my self a motley to the view,
  These blenches gave my heart another youth,
  And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
    Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
  And almost thence my nature is subdued
  To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
  Pity me then, and wish I were renewed,
    Pity me then dear friend, and I assure ye,
  You are my all the world, and I must strive,
  Of others' voices, that my adder's sense,
    That all the world besides methinks are dead.
  For it no form delivers to the heart
  Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
  For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
  The mountain, or the sea, the day, or night:
  The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
  Or whether doth my mind being crowned with you
  Drink up the monarch's plague this flattery?
  Or whether shall I say mine eye saith true,
  O 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing,
  And to his palate doth prepare the cup.
    If it be poisoned, 'tis the lesser sin,
  Yet then my judgment knew no reason why,
  Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
  Divert strong minds to the course of alt'ring things:
  Might I not then say 'Now I love you best,'
  Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
    Love is a babe, then might I not say so
  Let me not to the marriage of true minds
  Or bends with the remover to remove.
  It is the star to every wand'ring bark,
  But bears it out even to the edge of doom:
  That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
  Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
  Bring me within the level of your frown,
  To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
    But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
  How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted
  In the distraction of this madding fever!
  And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
  And soon to you, as you to me then tendered
  And the just pleasure lost, which is so deemed,
  Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing.
  For why should others' false adulterate eyes
  Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
  No, I am that I am, and they that level
  At my abuses, reckon up their own,
  I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
  By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown
    Unless this general evil they maintain,
    All men are bad and in their badness reign.
  Or at the least, so long as brain and heart
  Of thee, thy record never can be missed:
  Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
  To trust those tables that receive thee more:
    To keep an adjunct to remember thee
  Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire,
  And rather make them born to our desire,
  Than think that we before have heard them told:
  Thy registers and thee I both defy,
  Not wond'ring at the present, nor the past,
    I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.
  If my dear love were but the child of state,
  It might for Fortune's bastard be unfathered,
  Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gathered.
  Under the blow of thralled discontent,
    To this I witness call the fools of time,
  Were't aught to me I bore the canopy,
  With my extern the outward honouring,
  Pitiful thrivers in their gazing spent?
  But mutual render, only me for thee.
  Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st,
  Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st.
  As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back,
  She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
    And her quietus is to render thee.
  In the old age black was not counted fair,
  Fairing the foul with art's false borrowed face,
  Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem,
    Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
  To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
  At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand.
  To be so tickled they would change their state
    Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
  On purpose laid to make the taker mad.
    All this the world well knows yet none knows well,
    To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
  My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun,
  If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun:
  And in some perfumes is there more delight,
  Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
  My mistress when she walks treads on the ground.
  As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
  Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
  Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
  Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
  To say they err, I dare not be so bold,
  One on another's neck do witness bear
    And thence this slander as I think proceeds.
  Thine eyes I love, and they as pitying me,
  And truly not the morning sun of heaven
  Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
  Nor that full star that ushers in the even
  Doth half that glory to the sober west
  O let it then as well beseem thy heart
  To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
    And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
  Of him, my self, and thee I am forsaken,
  But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail,
  Thou canst not then use rigour in my gaol.
    And yet thou wilt, for I being pent in thee,
  My self I'll forfeit, so that other mine,
    He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.
  More than enough am I that vex thee still,
  Shall will in others seem right gracious,
  If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
  And will thy soul knows is admitted there,
  'Will', will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
  Then in the number let me pass untold,
  For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold,
  That nothing me, a something sweet to thee.
    And then thou lov'st me for my name is Will.
  That they behold and see not what they see?
  Yet what the best is, take the worst to be.
  Be anchored in the bay where all men ride,
  Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
  Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
    And to this false plague are they now transferred.
  Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
  Although she knows my days are past the best,
  O call not me to justify the wrong,
  Let me excuse thee, ah my love well knows,
  And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
  That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
  If I might teach thee wit better it were,
  As testy sick men when their deaths be near,
  No news but health from their physicians know.
  And in my madness might speak ill of thee,
  In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes,
  For they in thee a thousand errors note,
  But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
  To any sensual feast with thee alone:
  Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
  Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man,
  That have profaned their scarlet ornaments,
  Robbed others' beds' revenues of their rents.
  Be it lawful I love thee as thou lov'st those,
  Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee,
  One of her feathered creatures broke away,
  In pursuit of the thing she would have stay:
  So run'st thou after that which flies from thee,
  Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind,
  And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind.
  And whether that my angel be turned fiend,
  I guess one angel in another's hell.
  Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate',
  Poor soul the centre of my sinful earth,
  My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
    And death once dead, there's no more dying then.
  For that which longer nurseth the disease,
  Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
  My reason the physician to my love,
  At random from the truth vainly expressed.
    For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
  Or if they have, where is my judgment fled,
  That censures falsely what they see aright?
  What means the world to say it is not so?
  If it be not, then love doth well denote,
  No marvel then though I mistake my view,
  Canst thou O cruel, say I love thee not,
  When I against my self with thee partake?
  Do I not think on thee when I forgot
  Who hateth thee that I do call my friend,
  Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
  To make me give the lie to my true sight,
  And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
  That in the very refuse of thy deeds,
  Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
  O though I love what others do abhor,
  With others thou shouldst not abhor my state.
    More worthy I to be beloved of thee.
  Triumph in love, flesh stays no farther reason,
  But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
  In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
  But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee,
  For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee:
  And all my honest faith in thee is lost.
  And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
  Or made them swear against the thing they see.
    For I have sworn thee fair: more perjured I,
    To swear against the truth so foul a be.
  I sick withal the help of bath desired,
  And thither hied a sad distempered guest.
    But found no cure, the bath for my help lies,
  And so the general of hot desire,
    Came there for cure and this by that I prove,
  STEWARD, Servant to the Countess of Rousillon
  LAVACHE, a clown and Servant to the Countess of Rousillon
  A PAGE, Servant to the Countess of Rousillon
  COUNTESS OF ROUSILLON, mother to Bertram
  HELENA, a gentlewoman protected by the Countess
  DIANA, daughter to the Widow
  VIOLENTA, neighbour and friend to the Widow
  MARIANA, neighbour and friend to the Widow
Enter BERTRAM, the COUNTESS OF ROUSILLON, HELENA, and LAFEU, all in black
  BERTRAM. And I in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death anew;
  LAFEU. You shall find of the King a husband, madam; you, sir, a
    father. He that so generally is at all times good must of
    up where it wanted, rather than lack it where there is such
  COUNTESS. What hope is there of his Majesty's amendment?
    practices he hath persecuted time with hope, and finds no other
    advantage in the process but only the losing of hope by time.
  COUNTESS. This young gentlewoman had a father- O, that 'had,' how
    the King's sake, he were living! I think it would be the death of
    the King's disease.
  LAFEU. How call'd you the man you speak of, madam?
  LAFEU. He was excellent indeed, madam; the King very lately spoke
  BERTRAM. What is it, my good lord, the King languishes of?
  LAFEU. I would it were not notorious. Was this gentlewoman the
  COUNTESS. His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my
    there commendations go with pity-they are virtues and traitors
    too. In her they are the better for their simpleness; she derives
  COUNTESS. 'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise in.
    The remembrance of her father never approaches her heart but the
    more of this, Helena; go to, no more, lest it be rather thought
  LAFEU. Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead: excessive
    grief the enemy to the living.
  COUNTESS. If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess makes it
  COUNTESS. Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy father
    Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
    Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
    That thee may furnish, and my prayers pluck down,
  LAFEU. He cannot want the best
    servants to you!  [To HELENA]  Be comfortable to my mother, your
  LAFEU. Farewell, pretty lady; you must hold the credit of your
    father.                             Exeunt BERTRAM and LAFEU
  HELENA. O, were that all! I think not on my father;
    And these great tears grace his remembrance more
    I am undone; there is no living, none,
    The hind that would be mated by the lion
    Yet these fix'd evils sit so fit in him
    That they take place when virtue's steely bones
  HELENA. But he assails; and our virginity, though valiant in the
    Is there no military policy how virgins might blow up men?
    up; marry, in blowing him down again, with the breach yourselves
     made, you lose your city. It is not politic in the commonwealth
    increase; and there was never virgin got till virginity was first
  HELENA. I will stand for 't a little, though therefore I die a
  PAROLLES. There's little can be said in 't; 'tis against the rule
    of nature. To speak on the part of virginity is to accuse your
    mothers; which is most infallible disobedience. He that hangs
    cheese; consumes itself to the very paring, and so dies with
    idle, made of self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the
    increase; and the principal itself not much the worse. Away
    'Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with lying; the longer kept,
    the less worth. Off with't while 'tis vendible; answer the time
    fashion, richly suited but unsuitable; just like the brooch and
    the toothpick, which wear not now. Your date is better in your
    your old virginity, is like one of our French wither'd pears: it
    looks ill, it eats drily; marry, 'tis a wither'd pear; it was
    formerly better; marry, yet 'tis a wither'd pear. Will you
    A mother, and a mistress, and a friend,
    Which might be felt; that we, the poorer born,
    Might with effects of them follow our friends
  PAROLLES. Little Helen, farewell; if I can remember thee, I will
    think of thee at court.
  HELENA. When he was retrograde, I think, rather.
  HELENA. So is running away, when fear proposes the safety: but the
    a good wing, and I like the wear well.
  PAROLLES. I am so full of business I cannot answer thee acutely. I
    will return perfect courtier; in the which my instruction shall
    serve to naturalize thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtier's
    counsel, and understand what advice shall thrust upon thee; else
    thee away. Farewell. When thou hast leisure, say thy prayers;
    when thou hast none, remember thy friends. Get thee a good
    husband and use him as he uses thee. So, farewell.
    That weigh their pains in sense, and do suppose
Flourish of cornets. Enter the KING OF FRANCE, with letters,
    With caution, that the Florentine will move us
    Prejudicates the business, and would seem
    The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
    To stand on either part.
  FIRST LORD. It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord,
  KING. Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face;
    Frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
    Hath well compos'd thee. Thy father's moral parts
    As when thy father and myself in friendship
    Into the service of the time, and was
    Discipled of the bravest. He lasted long;
    To talk of your good father. In his youth
    He had the wit which I can well observe
    To-day in our young lords; but they may jest
    Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
    Ere they can hide their levity in honour.
    Were in his pride or sharpness; if they were,
    His equal had awak'd them; and his honour,
    Clock to itself, knew the true minute when
    He us'd as creatures of another place;
    And bow'd his eminent top to their low ranks,
    Making them proud of his humility
    In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
    Might be a copy to these younger times;
    Which, followed well, would demonstrate them now
    He scatter'd not in ears, but grafted them
    To grow there, and to bear- 'Let me not live'-
    On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
    'After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
    Mere fathers of their garments; whose constancies
    Expire before their fashions.' This he wish'd.
    Since the physician at your father's died?
    Lend me an arm-the rest have worn me out
    Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, Count;
  STEWARD. Madam, the care I have had to even your content I wish
    might be found in the calendar of my past endeavours; for then we
    wound our modesty, and make foul the clearness of our deservings,
    when of ourselves we publish them.
    them and have ability enough to make such knaveries yours.
    the rich are damn'd; but if I may have your ladyship's good will
    to go to the world, Isbel the woman and I will do as we may.
    think I shall never have the blessing of God till I have issue o'
    my body; for they say bames are blessings.
  CLOWN. My poor body, madam, requires it. I am driven on by the
    flesh; and he must needs go that the devil drives.
  CLOWN. Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons, such as they are.
  COUNTESS. May the world know them?
  CLOWN. Y'are shallow, madam-in great friends; for the knaves come
    spares my team, and gives me leave to in the crop. If I be his
    cuckold, he's my drudge. He that comforts my wife is the
    could be contented to be what they are, there were no fear in
    marriage; for young Charbon the puritan and old Poysam the
    papist, howsome'er their hearts are sever'd in religion, their
    heads are both one; they may jowl horns together like any deer
  CLOWN. A prophet I, madam; and I speak the truth the next way:
              For I the ballad will repeat,
               'Was this fair face the cause' quoth she
                 'Why the Grecians sacked Troy?
                 And gave this sentence then:
  COUNTESS. What, one good in ten? You corrupt the song, sirrah.
    song. Would God would serve the world so all the year! We'd find
    no fault with the tithe-woman, if I were the parson. One in ten,
    star, or at an earthquake, 'twould mend the lottery well: a man
    wear the surplice of humility over the black gown of a big heart.
    I am going, forsooth. The business is for Helen to come hither.
  COUNTESS. Faith I do. Her father bequeath'd her to me; and she
    herself, without other advantage, may lawfully make title to as
    words to her own ears; she thought, I dare vow for her, they
    difference betwixt their two estates; Love no god, that would not
    rescue in the first assault, or ransom afterward. This she
    deliver'd in the most bitter touch of sorrow that e'er I heard
    withal; sithence, in the loss that may happen, it concerns you
    tott'ring in the balance that I could neither believe nor
    thank you for your honest care. I will speak with you further
    If ever we are nature's, these are ours; this thorn
    It is the show and seal of nature's truth,
    Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
    I am a mother to you.
  COUNTESS. Nay, a mother.
    Why not a mother? When I said 'a mother,'
    Methought you saw a serpent. What's in 'mother'
    That you start at it? I say I am your mother,
    And put you in the catalogue of those
    You ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan,
    Yet I express to you a mother's care.
    To say I am thy mother? What's the matter,
  COUNTESS. I say I am your mother.
    The Count Rousillon cannot be my brother:
    He must not be my brother.
  COUNTESS. Nor I your mother?
  HELENA. You are my mother, madam; would you were-
    So that my lord your son were not my brother-
    Indeed my mother! Or were you both our mothers,
    So I were not his sister. Can't no other,
    But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?
    God shield you mean it not! 'daughter' and 'mother'
    Against the proclamation of thy passion,
    But tell me then, 'tis so; for, look, thy cheeks
    Confess it, th' one to th' other; and thine eyes
    That in their kind they speak it; only sin
    If it be not, forswear't; howe'er, I charge thee,
    Whereof the world takes note. Come, come, disclose
    Have to the full appeach'd.
    I still pour in the waters of my love,
    Was both herself and Love; O, then, give pity
    You know my father left me some prescriptions
    In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them,
    More than they were in note. Amongst the rest
    To cure the desperate languishings whereof
    Else Paris, and the medicine, and the King,
    Had from the conversation of my thoughts
    Haply been absent then.
    Are of a mind: he, that they cannot help him;
    They, that they cannot help. How shall they credit
    A poor unlearned virgin, when the schools,
    Embowell'd of their doctrine, have let off
    More than my father's skill, which was the great'st
    What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.          Exeunt
Flourish of cornets. Enter the KING with divers young LORDS taking leave
for the Florentine war; BERTRAM and PAROLLES; ATTENDANTS
  KING. Farewell, young lords; these war-like principles
    Share the advice betwixt you; if both gain all,
    Will not confess he owes the malady
    Whether I live or die, be you the sons
    Those bated that inherit but the fall
    Of the last monarchy-see that you come
  KING. Those girls of Italy, take heed of them;
    If they demand; beware of being captives
  KING. Farewell.  [To ATTENDANTS]  Come hither to me.
  PAROLLES. 'Tis not his fault, the spark.
  BERTRAM. I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
    Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
  FIRST LORD. There's honour in the theft.
    lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall find in the regiment of
    the Spinii one Captain Spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of
                            Re-enter the KING
  BERTRAM. Stay; the King!
  PAROLLES. Use a more spacious ceremony to the noble lords; you have
    restrain'd yourself within the list of too cold an adieu. Be more
    expressive to them; for they wear themselves in the cap of the
    time; there do muster true gait; eat, speak, and move, under the
    influence of the most receiv'd star; and though the devil lead
    the measure, such are to be followed. After them, and take a more
  KING. I'll fee thee to stand up.
    And ask'd thee mercy for't.
    Could reach them: I have seen a medicine
    That's able to breathe life into a stone,
  LAFEU. Why, Doctor She! My lord, there's one arriv'd,
    Bring in the admiration, that we with the
    And not be all day neither.                       Exit LAFEU
    That dare leave two together. Fare you well.            Exit
    Gerard de Narbon was my father,
  HELENA. The rather will I spare my praises towards him;
    Which, as the dearest issue of his practice,
    With that malignant cause wherein the honour
    Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power,
  HELENA. My duty then shall pay me for my pains.
  KING. I cannot give thee less, to be call'd grateful.
    Oft does them by the weakest minister.
    When miracles have by the greatest been denied.
    Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
  KING. I must not hear thee. Fare thee well, kind maid;
    Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.
    The help of heaven we count the act of men.
    Myself against the level of mine aim;
    Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
    Or four and twenty times the pilot's glass
    Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass,
    Sear'd otherwise; ne worse of worst-extended
  KING. Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
    In common sense, sense saves another way.
    Worth name of life in thee hath estimate:
    Exempted be from me the arrogance
    To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
    Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.
  KING. Here is my hand; the premises observ'd,
    So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
    Thy resolv'd patient, on thee still rely.
    More should I question thee, and more I must,
  COUNTESS. Come on, sir; I shall now put you to the height of your
    business is but to the court.
  COUNTESS. To the court! Why, what place make you special, when you
    put off that with such contempt? But to the court!
    cap, kiss his hand, and say nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip,
    the court; but for me, I have an answer will serve all men.
  CLOWN. It is like a barber's chair, that fits all buttocks-the pin
    buttock, the quatch buttock, the brawn buttock, or any buttock.
  CLOWN. As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney, as your
    as the nail to his hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding
    quean to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the friar's
    mouth; nay, as the pudding to his skin.
  CLOWN. But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned should
    question, hoping to be the wiser by your answer. I pray you, sir,
    hundred of them.
  COUNTESS. I play the noble housewife with the time,
  CLOWN. O Lord, sir!-Why, there't serves well again.
  CLOWN. Not much commendation to them?
  CLOWN. Most fruitfully; I am there before my legs.
  PAROLLES. Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath shot
  LAFEU. To be relinquish'd of the artists-
  LAFEU. Of all the learned and authentic fellows-
  PAROLLES. Why, there 'tis; so say I too.
  LAFEU. I may truly say it is a novelty to the world.
  LAFEU.  [Reading the ballad title]  'A Showing of a Heavenly
  PAROLLES. That's it; I would have said the very same.
  PAROLLES. Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange; that is the brief
    and the tedious of it; and he's of a most facinerious spirit that
    will not acknowledge it to be the-
    which should, indeed, give us a further use to be made than alone
    the recov'ry of the King, as to be-
  PAROLLES. I would have said it; you say well. Here comes the King.
  LAFEU. Lustig, as the Dutchman says. I'll like a maid the better,
  KING. Go, call before me all the lords in court.
    O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice
    Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.
    My mouth no more were broken than these boys',
  KING. Peruse them well.
    Not one of those but had a noble father.
    Heaven hath through me restor'd the King to health.
  HELENA. I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest
    Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever,
    We'll ne'er come there again.'
  HELENA. Thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.
  LAFEU. I had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace for my
  LAFEU. Do all they deny her? An they were sons of mine I'd have
    them whipt; or I would send them to th' Turk to make eunuchs of.
  LAFEU. These boys are boys of ice; they'll none have her.
    Sure, they are bastards to the English; the French ne'er got 'em.
  LAFEU. There's one grape yet; I am sure thy father drunk wine-but
    thee already.
    Into your guiding power. This is the man.
  KING. Why, then, young Bertram, take her; she's thy wife.
    She had her breeding at my father's charge.
    Rather corrupt me ever!
  KING. 'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which
    Of colour, weight, and heat, pour'd all together,
    Of virtue for the name; but do not so.
    The place is dignified by the doer's deed;
    Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair;
    In these to nature she's immediate heir;
    And these breed honour. That is honour's scorn
    And is not like the sire. Honours thrive
    When rather from our acts we them derive
    Where dust and damn'd oblivion is the tomb
    I can create the rest. Virtue and she
    Let the rest go.
  KING. My honour's at the stake; which to defeat,
    Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know
    Or I will throw thee from my care for ever
    Into the staggers and the careless lapse
    Loosing upon thee in the name of justice,
    The praised of the King; who, so ennobled,
  KING. Take her by the hand,
  KING. Good fortune and the favour of the King
    Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief,
    Shall more attend upon the coming space,
  LAFEU. Are you companion to the Count Rousillon?
  LAFEU. To what is count's man: count's master is of another style.
  LAFEU. I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man; to which title age
    cannot bring thee.
  LAFEU. I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a pretty wise
    pass. Yet the scarfs and the bannerets about thee did manifoldly
    dissuade me from believing thee a vessel of too great a burden. I
    have now found thee; when I lose thee again I care not; yet art
  PAROLLES. Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity upon thee-
    trial; which if-Lord have mercy on thee for a hen! So, my good
    window of lattice, fare thee well; thy casement I need not open,
    for I look through thee. Give me thy hand.
  LAFEU. Yes, good faith, ev'ry dram of it; and I will not bate thee
    have a desire to hold my acquaintance with thee, or rather my
    knowledge, that I may say in the default 'He is a man I know.'
    eternal; for doing I am past, as I will by thee, in what motion
    scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord! Well, I must be patient; there
  LAFEU. Sirrah, your lord and master's married; there's news for
    thy arms o' this fashion? Dost make hose of thy sleeves? Do other
    thee. Methink'st thou art a general offence, and every man should
    beat thee. I think thou wast created for men to breathe
    themselves upon thee.
    you are more saucy with lords and honourable personages than the
    not worth another word, else I'd call you knave. I leave you.
  PAROLLES. Good, very, good, it is so then. Good, very good; let it
  PAROLLES. What's the matter, sweetheart?
  BERTRAM. Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
  PAROLLES. What, what, sweetheart?
  BERTRAM. O my Parolles, they have married me!
    I'll to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.
  BERTRAM. There's letters from my mother; what th' import is I know
    Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
    Of Mars's fiery steed. To other regions!
    Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
    And wherefore I am fled; write to the King
    To the dark house and the detested wife.
  PAROLLES. Will this capriccio hold in thee, art sure?
    I'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
  PAROLLES. Why, these balls bound; there's noise in it. 'Tis hard:
  HELENA. My mother greets me kindly; is she well?
  CLOWN. One, that she's not in heaven, whither God send her quickly!
    The other, that she's in earth, from whence God send her quickly!
  PAROLLES. You had my prayers to lead them on; and to keep them on,
    have them still. O, my knave, how does my old lady?
  CLOWN. Marry, you are the wiser man; for many a man's tongue shakes
  PAROLLES. Go to, thou art a witty fool; I have found thee.
    in you, even to the world's pleasure and the increase of
    Which they distil now in the curbed time,
    To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
    And pleasure drown the brim.
    Attend his further pleasure.
  BERTRAM. And by other warranted testimony.
  LAFEU. I have then sinn'd against his experience and transgress'd
    make us friends; I will pursue the amity
  BERTRAM.  [Aside to PAROLLES]  Is she gone to the King?
    When I should take possession of the bride,
  LAFEU. A good traveller is something at the latter end of a dinner;
  BERTRAM. Is there any unkindness between my lord and you, monsieur?
    like him that leapt into the custard; and out of it you'll run
    again, rather than suffer question for your residence.
    Fare you well, my lord; and believe this of me: there can be no
    kernal in this light nut; the soul of this man is his clothes;
    trust him not in matter of heavy consequence; I have kept of them
    tame, and know their natures. Farewell, monsieur; I have spoken
    Spoke with the King, and have procur'd his leave
    Which holds not colour with the time, nor does
    For such a business; therefore am I found
    And rather muse than ask why I entreat you;
    For my respects are better than they seem,
    And my appointments have in them a need
    Greater than shows itself at the first view
    To you that know them not. This to my mother.
  HELENA. I am not worthy of the wealth I owe,
  BERTRAM. Where are my other men, monsieur?
    Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.
        Flourish. Enter the DUKE OF FLORENCE, attended; two
  FIRST LORD. Holy seems the quarrel
    On the opposer.
    That the great figure of a council frames
    By self-unable motion; therefore dare not
  FIRST LORD. But I am sure the younger of our nature,
    That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
  DUKE. Welcome shall they be
    And all the honours that can fly from us
    Shall on them settle. You know your places well;
    When better fall, for your avails they fell.
  CLOWN. Why, he will look upon his boot and sing; mend the ruff and
  CLOWN. E'en that you have there.                          Exit
    recovered the King and undone me. I have wedded her, not bedded
    her; and sworn to make the "not" eternal. You shall hear I am run
    away; know it before the report come. If there be breadth enough
    in the world, I will hold a long distance. My duty to you.
    To fly the favours of so good a king,
    By the misprizing of a maid too virtuous
    For the contempt of empire.
  COUNTESS. What is the -matter?
  CLOWN. Nay, there is some comfort in the news, some comfort; your
  CLOWN. So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he does the
    danger is in standing to 't; that's the loss of men, though it be
    the getting of children. Here they come will tell you more. For my
              Enter HELENA and the two FRENCH GENTLEMEN
    That the first face of neither, on the start,
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Madam, he's gone to serve the Duke of Florence.
    We met him thitherward; for thence we came,
    Thither we bend again.
    [Reads]  'When thou canst get the ring upon my finger, which
    that I am father to, then call me husband; but in such a "then" I
    And for the contents' sake are sorry for our pains.
  COUNTESS. I prithee, lady, have a better cheer;
    If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
    The Duke will lay upon him all the honour
  COUNTESS. Return you thither?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.
  COUNTESS. Find you that there?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. 'Tis but the boldness of his hand haply, which
    That chase thee from thy country, and expose
    Those tender limbs of thine to the event
    Of the non-sparing war? And is it I
    That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
    Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
    That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
    Fly with false aim; move the still-piecing air,
    Whoever shoots at him, I set him there;
    I am the caitiff that do hold him to't;
    And though I kill him not, I am the cause
    I met the ravin lion when he roar'd
    That all the miseries which nature owes
    My being here it is that holds thee hence.
    The air of paradise did fan the house,
    For with the dark, poor thief, I'll steal away.         Exit
Florence. Before the DUKE's palace
Flourish. Enter the DUKE OF FLORENCE, BERTRAM, PAROLLES, SOLDIERS,
  COUNTESS. Alas! and would you take the letter of her?
  STEWARD.  [Reads]  'I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone.
    That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon,
    Write, write, that from the bloody course of war
    Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth.
    And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath
    Dispatch the most convenient messenger.
    Led hither by pure love. Which of them both
Without the walls of Florence
VIOLENTA, and MARIANA, with other CITIZENS
  WIDOW. Nay, come; for if they do approach the city we shall lose
    all the sight.
  DIANA. They say the French count has done most honourable service.
  WIDOW. It is reported that he has taken their great'st commander;
    and that with his own hand he slew the Duke's brother.  [Tucket]
    We have lost our labour; they are gone a contrary way. Hark! you
    may know by their trumpets.
  MARIANA. Come, let's return again, and suffice ourselves with the
    report of it. Well, Diana, take heed of this French earl; the
    officer he is in those suggestions for the young earl. Beware of
    them, Diana: their promises, enticements, oaths, tokens, and all
    these engines of lust, are not the things they go under; many a
    maid hath been seduced by them; and the misery is, example, that
    so terrible shows in the wreck of maidenhood, cannot for all that
    dissuade succession, but that they are limed with the twigs that
    threatens them. I hope I need not to advise you further; but I
    hope your own grace will keep you where you are, though there
    were no further danger known but the modesty which is so lost.
            Enter HELENA in the dress of a pilgrim
    at my house: thither they send one another. I'll question her.
    God save you, pilgrim! Whither are bound?
    Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?
  WIDOW. At the Saint Francis here, beside the port.
  HELENA. Is this the way?
    But till the troops come by,
    The rather for I think I know your hostess
  HELENA. But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him;
    As 'tis reported, for the King had married him
  HELENA. Ay, surely, mere the truth; I know his lady.
  DIANA. There is a gentleman that serves the Count
    In argument of praise, or to the worth
    Of the great Count himself, she is too mean
    'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife
    May be the amorous Count solicits her
    In the unlawful purpose.
    Corrupt the tender honour of a maid;
    Enter, with drum and colours, BERTRAM, PAROLLES, and the
  WIDOW. So, now they come.
    That is Antonio, the Duke's eldest son;
  HELENA. Which is the Frenchman?
    That with the plume; 'tis a most gallant fellow.
    That leads him to these places; were I his lady
    To eat with us to-night; the charge and thanking
    Shall be for me, and, to requite you further,
    Worthy the note.
Enter BERTRAM, and the two FRENCH LORDS
    promise-breaker, the owner of no one good quality worthy your
    him; such I will have whom I am sure he knows not from the enemy.
    We will bind and hoodwink him so that he shall suppose no other
    but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries when
    his examination; if he do not, for the promise of his life and in
    the highest compulsion of base fear, offer to betray you and
    deliver all the intelligence in his power against you, and that
    with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never trust my
  FIRST LORD. O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum; he
    says he has a stratagem for't. When your lordship sees the bottom
  SECOND LORD. O, for the love of laughter, hinder not the honour of
  FIRST LORD. That was not to be blam'd in the command of the
    have prevented, if he had been there to command.
    Some dishonour we had in the loss of that drum; but it is not to
  PAROLLES. It is to be recovered. But that the merit of service is
    seldom attributed to the true and exact performer, I would have
    that drum or another, or 'hic jacet.'
    again into his native quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise,
    and go on; I will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit. If you
    speed well in it, the Duke shall both speak of it and extend to
    you what further becomes his greatness, even to the utmost
  PAROLLES. By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it.
    into my mortal preparation; and by midnight look to hear further
  PAROLLES. I know not what the success will be, my lord, but the
  BERTRAM. I know th' art valiant; and, to the of thy soldiership,
    will subscribe for thee. Farewell.
  SECOND LORD. None in the world; but return with an invention, and
  FIRST LORD. We'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case him.
    He was first smok'd by the old Lord Lafeu. When his disguise and
  BERTRAM. Your brother, he shall go along with me.
  BERTRAM. Now will I lead you to the house, and show you
  BERTRAM. That's all the fault. I spoke with her but once,
    I know not how I shall assure you further
    But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.
    Nothing acquainted with these businesses;
  FIRST give me trust the Count he is my husband,
    Is so from word to word; and then you cannot,
    By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
    That she'll demand. A ring the County wears
    Since the first father wore it. This ring he holds
  HELENA. You see it lawful then. It is no more
    In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
  HELENA. Why then to-night
Without the Florentine camp
Enter SECOND FRENCH LORD with five or six other SOLDIERS in ambush
  SECOND LORD. He can come no other way but by this hedge-corner.
    neighbouring languages, therefore we must every one be a man of
    his own fancy; not to know what we speak one to another, so we
    hours in a sleep, and then to return and swear the lies he forges.
  PAROLLES. Ten o'clock. Within these three hours 'twill be time
    tongue is too foolhardy; but my heart hath the fear of Mars
    before it, and of his creatures, not daring the reports of my
  SECOND LORD. This is the first truth that e'er thine own tongue was
  PAROLLES. What the devil should move me to undertake the recovery
    of this drum, being not ignorant of the impossibility, and
    say I got them in exploit. Yet slight ones will not carry it.
    dare not give. Wherefore, what's the instance? Tongue, I must put
    you into a butterwoman's mouth, and buy myself another of
    Bajazet's mule, if you prattle me into these perils.
  PAROLLES. I would the cutting of my garments would serve the turn,
    or the breaking of my Spanish sword.
  PAROLLES. Or the baring of my beard; and to say it was in
  PAROLLES. Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripp'd.
  PAROLLES. Though I swore I leap'd from the window of the citadel-
  PAROLLES. I would I had any drum of the enemy's; I would swear I
  PAROLLES. A drum now of the enemy's!
  PAROLLES. I know you are the Muskos' regiment,
    If there be here German, or Dane, Low Dutch,
    I'll discover that which shall undo the Florentine.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Boskos vauvado. I understand thee, and can speak thy
    tongue. Kerely-bonto, sir, betake thee to thy faith, for
  FIRST SOLDIER. The General is content to spare thee yet;
    And, hoodwink'd as thou art, will lead thee on
    To gather from thee. Haply thou mayst inform
    And all the secrets of our camp I'll show,
    Their force, their purposes. Nay, I'll speak that
  SECOND LORD. Go, tell the Count Rousillon and my brother
    We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
    Till we do hear from them.
  SECOND LORD. Till then I'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
    If the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
    And now you should be as your mother was
  DIANA. She then was honest.
    My mother did but duty; such, my lord,
    I prithee do not strive against my vows.
    I was compell'd to her; but I love the
    Do thee all rights of service.
  DIANA. 'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
    But the plain single vow that is vow'd true.
    But take the High'st to witness. Then, pray you, tell me:
    And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
    Who then recovers. Say thou art mine, and ever
  BERTRAM. I'll lend it thee, my dear, but have no power
    Bequeathed down from many ancestors;
    Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
    My chastity's the jewel of our house,
    Bequeathed down from many ancestors;
    Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
    Brings in the champion Honour on my part
    And I'll be bid by thee.
    I'll order take my mother shall not hear.
    Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
    Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me:
    My reasons are most strong; and you shall know them
    And on your finger in the night I'll put
    Another ring, that what in time proceeds
    May token to the future our past deeds.
    Adieu till then; then fail not. You have won
    A wife of me, though there my hope be done.
  BERTRAM. A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.
    You may so in the end.
    My mother told me just how he would woo,
    Have the like oaths. He had sworn to marry me
    When his wife's dead; therefore I'll lie with him
Enter the two FRENCH LORDS, and two or three SOLDIERS
  SECOND LORD. You have not given him his mother's letter?
    in't that stings his nature; for on the reading it he chang'd
    almost into another man.
  FIRST LORD. Especially he hath incurred the everlasting displeasure
    of the King, who had even tun'd his bounty to sing happiness to
  SECOND LORD. When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and I am the grave
    the spoil of her honour. He hath given her his monumental ring,
    and thinks himself made in the unchaste composition.
  FIRST LORD. Merely our own traitors. And as in the common course of
    all treasons we still see them reveal themselves till they attain
    to their abhorr'd ends; so he that in this action contrives
    unlawful intents? We shall not then have his company to-night?
    presence must be the whip of the other.
  SECOND LORD. In the meantime, what hear you of these wars?
  FIRST LORD. I hear there is an overture of peace.
  FIRST LORD. What will Count Rousillon do then? Will he travel
  SECOND LORD. I perceive, by this demand, you are not altogether
    accomplish'd; and, there residing, the tenderness of her nature
    makes her story true even to the point of her death. Her death
    faithfully confirm'd by the rector of the place.
  FIRST LORD. Hath the Count all this intelligence?
  SECOND LORD. Ay, and the particular confirmations, point from
    point, to the full arming of the verity.
  FIRST LORD. And how mightily some other times we drown our gain in
    together. Our virtues would be proud if our faults whipt them
    not; and our crimes would despair if they were not cherish'd by
  SERVANT. He met the Duke in the street, sir; of whom he hath taken
    Duke hath offered him letters of commendations to the King.
  SECOND LORD. They shall be no more than needful there, if they were
    more than they can commend.
  FIRST LORD. They cannot be too sweet for the King's tartness.
    length apiece; by an abstract of success: I have congied with the
    her; writ to my lady mother I am returning; entertain'd my
    convoy; and between these main parcels of dispatch effected many
    nicer needs. The last was the greatest, but that I have not ended
  SECOND LORD. If the business be of any difficulty and this morning
  BERTRAM. I mean the business is not ended, as fearing to hear of it
    hereafter. But shall we have this dialogue between the Fool and
    the Soldier? Come, bring forth this counterfeit module has
  SECOND LORD. I have told your lordship already the stocks carry
    Morgan, whom he supposes to be a friar, from the time of his
    have the patience to hear it.
  FIRST SOLDIER. He calls for the tortures. What will you say without
  FIRST SOLDIER. 'First demand of him how many horse the Duke is
    The troops are all scattered, and the commanders very poor
  PAROLLES. Do; I'll take the sacrament on 't, how and which way you
    the gallant militarist-that was his own phrase-that had the whole
    theoric of war in the knot of his scarf, and the practice in the
    thereabouts' set down, for I'll speak truth.
  SECOND LORD. He's very near the truth in this.
  BERTRAM. But I con him no thanks for't in the nature he delivers it.
  PAROLLES. I humbly thank you, sir. A truth's a truth-the rogues are
  FIRST SOLDIER. 'Demand of him of what strength they are a-foot.'
    that the muster-file, rotten and sound, upon my life, amounts not
    to fifteen thousand poll; half of the which dare not shake the
    snow from off their cassocks lest they shake themselves to
    condition, and what credit I have with the Duke.
    whether one Captain Dumain be i' th' camp, a Frenchman; what his
    reputation is with the Duke, what his valour, honesty, expertness
    in wars; or whether he thinks it were not possible, with
  PAROLLES. I beseech you, let me answer to the particular of the
    inter'gatories. Demand them singly.
    whence he was whipt for getting the shrieve's fool with child-a
    brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Well, is this captain in the Duke of Florence's
  FIRST SOLDIER. What is his reputation with the Duke?
  PAROLLES. The Duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of
    mine; and writ to me this other day to turn him out o' th' band.
  PAROLLES. In good sadness, I do not know; either it is there or it
    is upon a file with the Duke's other letters in my tent.
  FIRST SOLDIER.  [Reads]  'Dian, the Count's a fool, and full of
  PAROLLES. That is not the Duke's letter, sir; that is an
    heed of the allurement of one Count Rousillon, a foolish idle
  PAROLLES. My meaning in't, I protest, was very honest in the behalf
    of the maid; for I knew the young Count to be a dangerous and
    the fry it finds.
    After he scores, he never pays the score.
    And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this:
    For count of this, the Count's a fool, I know it,
    Thine, as he vow'd to thee in thine ear,
  BERTRAM. He shall be whipt through the army with this rhyme in's
  FIRST LORD. This is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold
    linguist, and the amnipotent soldier.
    but that, my offences being many, I would repent out the
    therefore, once more to this Captain Dumain: you have answer'd to
    his reputation with the Duke, and to his valour; what is his
    in his sleep he does little harm, save to his bedclothes about
    him; but they know his conditions and lay him in straw. I have
  PAROLLES. Faith, sir, has led the drum before the English
    I know not, except in that country he had the honour to be the
    officer at a place there called Mile-end to instruct for the
    doubling of files-I would do the man what honour I can-but of
  SECOND LORD. He hath out-villain'd villainy so far that the rarity
  PAROLLES. Sir, for a cardecue he will sell the fee-simple of his
    salvation, the inheritance of it; and cut th' entail from all
  FIRST SOLDIER. What's his brother, the other Captain Dumain?
  PAROLLES. E'en a crow o' th' same nest; not altogether so great as
    the first in goodness, but greater a great deal in evil. He
    excels his brother for a coward; yet his brother is reputed one
    of the best that is. In a retreat he outruns any lackey: marry,
    in coming on he has the cramp.
    the Florentine?
  PAROLLES. Ay, and the Captain of his Horse, Count Rousillon.
  FIRST SOLDIER. I'll whisper with the General, and know his
    Only to seem to deserve well, and to beguile the supposition of
    that lascivious young boy the Count, have I run into this danger.
    The General says you that have so traitorously discover'd the
    very nobly held, can serve the world for no honest use; therefore
  SECOND LORD. Good Captain, will you give me a copy of the sonnet
    you writ to Diana in behalf of the Count Rousillon? An I were not
    you there.                                Exit with SOLDIERS
    As captain shall. Simply the thing I am
    I'll after them.                                        Exit
    One of the greatest in the Christian world
    And by the leave of my good lord the King,
    That can such sweet use make of what they hate,
    When saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts
    Defiles the pitchy night. So lust doth play
    With what it loathes, for that which is away.
    But with the word the time will bring on summer,
    All's Well that Ends Well. Still the fine's the crown.
    Whate'er the course, the end is the renown.           Exeunt
    there, whose villainous saffron would have made all the unbak'd
    advanc'd by the King than by that red-tail'd humble-bee I speak
  COUNTESS. I would I had not known him. It was the death of the most
    she had partaken of my flesh, and cost me the dearest groans of a
    mother. I could not have owed her a more rooted love.
    sallets ere we light on such another herb.
  CLOWN. Indeed, sir, she was the sweet-marjoram of the sallet, or,
    rather, the herb of grace.
  LAFEU. They are not sallet-herbs, you knave; they are nose-herbs.
  LAFEU. Whether dost thou profess thyself-a knave or a fool?
  CLOWN. I would cozen the man of his wife, and do his service.
  LAFEU. I will subscribe for thee; thou art both knave and fool.
    hotter in France than there.
  CLOWN. The Black Prince, sir; alias, the Prince of Darkness; alias,
    the devil.
  LAFEU. Hold thee, there's my purse. I give thee not this to suggest
    thee from thy master thou talk'st of; serve him still.
    and the master I speak of ever keeps a good fire. But, sure, he
    is the prince of the world; let his nobility remain in's court. I
    am for the house with the narrow gate, which I take to be too
    little for pomp to enter. Some that humble themselves may; but
    the many will be too chill and tender: and they'll be for the
    flow'ry way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire.
  LAFEU. Go thy ways, I begin to be aweary of thee; and I tell thee
    so before, because I would not fall out with thee. Go thy ways;
  CLOWN. If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be jades'
    tricks, which are their own right by the law of nature.
    you, since I heard of the good lady's death, and that my lord
    your son was upon his return home, I moved the King my master to
    speak in the behalf of my daughter; which, in the minority of
    them both, his Majesty out of a self-gracious remembrance did
    stop up the displeasure he hath conceived against your son, there
    your lordship to remain with me tal they meet together.
    on's face; whether there be a scar under 't or no, the velvet
    I long to talk with the young noble soldier.
  CLOWN. Faith, there's a dozen of 'em, with delicate fine hats, and
    most courteous feathers, which bow the head and nod at every man.
    But since you have made the days and nights as one,
  HELENA. Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.
  GENTLEMAN. I have been sometimes there.
    From the report that goes upon your goodness;
    And therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions,
    The use of your own virtues, for the which
    To give this poor petition to the King;
    I do beseech you, whither is he gone?
    Whither I am going.
    Since you are like to see the King before me,
    Commend the paper to his gracious hand;
    But rather make you thank your pains for it.
Rousillon. The inner court of the COUNT'S palace
    familiarity with fresher clothes; but I am now, sir, muddied in
    of Fortune's butt'ring. Prithee, allow the wind.
    against any man's metaphor. Prithee, get thee further.
  CLOWN. Foh! prithee stand away. A paper from Fortune's close-stool
    a musk-cat, that has fall'n into the unclean fishpond of her
    use the carp as you may; for he looks like a poor, decayed,
    nails now. Wherein have you played the knave with Fortune, that
    you. Let the justices make you and Fortune friends; I am for
    other business.
  LAFEU. You beg more than word then. Cox my passion! give me your
  PAROLLES. O my good lord, you were the first that found me.
  LAFEU. Was I, in sooth? And I was the first that lost thee.
  LAFEU. Out upon thee, knave! Dost thou put upon me at once both the
    office of God and the devil? One brings the in grace, and the
    other brings thee out.    [Trumpets sound]  The King's coming; I
    know by his trumpets. Sirrah, inquire further after me; I had
Flourish. Enter KING, COUNTESS, LAFEU, the two FRENCH LORDS, with ATTENDANTS
    As mad in folly, lack'd the sense to know
    And watch'd the time to shoot.
    But first, I beg my pardon: the young lord
    Did to his Majesty, his mother, and his lady,
    Whose beauty did astonish the survey
    Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither;
    We are reconcil'd, and the first view shall kill
    In me at once. But to the brightest beams
    Not one word more of the consumed time.
    Let's take the instant by the forward top;
    Steals ere we can effect them. You remember
    Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
    Which warp'd the line of every other favour,
    From the great compt; but love that comes too late,
    To the great sender turns a sour offence,
    Not knowing them until we know their grave.
    Destroy our friends, and after weep their dust;
    While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
  COUNTESS. Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless!
    Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!
    To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
    Wrapp'd in a paper, which contain'd the name
    As she had made the overture, she ceas'd,
    Receive the ring again.
    That knows the tinct and multiplying med'cine,
    You got it from her. She call'd the saints to surety
    My fore-past proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
    We'll sift this matter further.
    Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not:
    Vanquish'd thereto by the fair grace and speech
    Of the poor suppliant, who by this, I know,
  KING.  [Reads the letter]  'Upon his many protestations to marry me
    when his wife was dead, I blush to say it, he won me. Now is the
    in you it best lies; otherwise a seducer flourishes, and a poor
  KING. The heavens have thought well on thee, Lafeu,
    To bring forth this discov'ry. Seek these suitors.
    Go speedily, and bring again the Count.
    I am afeard the life of Helen, lady,
  COUNTESS. Now, justice on the doers!
    And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
    Derived from the ancient Capilet.
    And therefore know how far I may be pitied.
  WIDOW. I am her mother, sir, whose age and honour
  KING. Come hither, Count; do you know these women?
  BERTRAM. My lord, I neither can nor will deny
    But that I know them. Do they charge me further?
    Either both or none.
  KING. Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
    Till your deeds gain them. Fairer prove your honour
    And was a common gamester to the camp.
  LAFEU. I saw the man to-day, if man he be.
  KING. Find him, and bring him hither.        Exit an ATTENDANT
    With all the spots o' th' world tax'd and debauch'd,
    Subdu'd me to her rate. She got the ring;
  KING. The story, then, goes false you threw it him
  DIANA. I have spoke the truth.
  BERTRAM. My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.
  KING. You boggle shrewdly; every feather starts you.
    Is this the man you speak of?
    Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
  PAROLLES. Yes, so please your Majesty. I did go between them, as I
    not what. Yet I was in that credit with them at that time that I
    knew of their going to bed; and of other motions, as promising
    of; therefore I will not speak what I know.
  KING. Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst say they are
    married; but thou art too fine in thy evidence; therefore stand
  DIANA. It was not lent me neither.
  KING. Where did you find it then?
  KING. If it were yours by none of all these ways,
  KING. I think thee now some common customer.
    I am either maid, or else this old man's wife.
  DIANA. Good mother, fetch my bail. Stay, royal sir;
    The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for,
    So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick-
    And now behold the meaning.
  KING. Is there no exorcist
    Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
    'Tis but the shadow of a wife you see,
    The name and not the thing.
    O my dear mother, do I see you living?
    thank thee. Wait on me home, I'll make sport with thee;
    let thy curtsies alone, they are scurvy ones.
    To make the even truth in pleasure flow.
    Of that and all the progress, more and less,
    The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.       [Flourish]
  KING. The King's a beggar, now the play is done.
    Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts;
    O'erflows the measure. Those his goodly eyes,
    That o'er the files and musters of the war
    The office and devotion of their view
    Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst
    And is become the bellows and the fan
     Flourish. Enter ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, her LADIES, the train,
    Look where they come!
    The triple pillar of the world transform'd
  ANTONY. There's beggary in the love that can be reckon'd.
  ANTONY. Grates me the sum.
  CLEOPATRA. Nay, hear them, Antony.
    If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent
    Perform't, or else we damn thee.'
    Is come from Caesar; therefore hear it, Antony.
    Call in the messengers. As I am Egypt's Queen,
  ANTONY. Let Rome in Tiber melt, and the wide arch
    Of the rang'd empire fall! Here is my space.
    On pain of punishment, the world to weet
    I'll seem the fool I am not. Antony
    Now for the love of Love and her soft hours,
    Let's not confound the time with conference harsh;
  CLEOPATRA. Hear the ambassadors.
    To make itself in thee fair and admir'd.
    To-night we'll wander through the streets and note
                     Exeunt ANTONY and CLEOPATRA, with the train
    That he approves the common liar, who
    most absolute Alexas, where's the soothsayer that you prais'd so
  CHARMIAN. Is this the man? Is't you, sir, that know things?
  ENOBARBUS. Bring in the banquet quickly; wine enough
  CHARMIAN. Pray, then, foresee me one.
  CHARMIAN. I had rather heat my liver with drinking.
    three kings in a forenoon, and widow them all. Let me have a
  SOOTHSAYER. You shall outlive the lady whom you serve.
    Prithee, how many boys and wenches must I have?
  CHARMIAN. Out, fool! I forgive thee for a witch.
  CHARMIAN. E'en as the o'erflowing Nilus presageth famine.
    cannot scratch mine ear. Prithee, tell her but worky-day fortune.
    sweet Isis, I beseech thee! And let her die too, and give him a
    worse! And let worse follow worse, till the worst of all follow
    Isis, I beseech thee!
  IRAS. Amen. Dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people! For, as
  ALEXAS. Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make me a cuckold, they
    would make themselves whores but they'ld do't!
  CHARMIAN. Not he; the Queen.
  CLEOPATRA. He was dispos'd to mirth; but on the sudden
  CLEOPATRA. Seek him, and bring him hither. Where's Alexas?
                       Exeunt CLEOPATRA, ENOBARBUS, and the rest
  MESSENGER. Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.
  ANTONY. Against my brother Lucius?
    But soon that war had end, and the time's state
    Made friends of them, jointing their force 'gainst Caesar,
    Whose better issue in the war from Italy
    Upon the first encounter drave them.
  MESSENGER. The nature of bad news infects the teller.
  ANTONY. When it concerns the fool or coward. On!
  ANTONY. Speak to me home; mince not the general tongue;
    Have power to utter. O, then we bring forth weeds
    Is as our earing. Fare thee well awhile.
  ANTONY. From Sicyon, ho, the news! Speak there!
  FIRST ATTENDANT. The man from Sicyon- is there such an one?
                 Enter another MESSENGER with a letter
    Importeth thee to know, this bears.       [Gives the letter]
    We wish it ours again; the present pleasure,
    Ten thousand harms, more than the ills I know,
  ENOBARBUS. Why, then we kill all our women. We see how mortal an
    unkindness is to them; if they suffer our departure, death's the
    to cast them away for nothing, though between them and a great
    cause they should be esteemed nothing. Cleopatra, catching but
    the least noise of this, dies instantly; I have seen her die
    twenty times upon far poorer moment. I do think there is mettle
  ENOBARBUS. Alack, sir, no! Her passions are made of nothing but the
    sighs and tears; they are greater storms and tempests than
  ENOBARBUS. O Sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of
  ENOBARBUS. Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. When it
    pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man from him, it
    shows to man the tailors of the earth; comforting therein that
    when old robes are worn out there are members to make new. If
    there were no more women but Fulvia, then had you indeed a cut,
    and the case to be lamented. This grief is crown'd with
    indeed the tears live in an onion that should water this sorrow.
  ANTONY. The business she hath broached in the state
  ENOBARBUS. And the business you have broach'd here cannot be
    The cause of our expedience to the Queen,
    Do strongly speak to us; but the letters to
    Hath given the dare to Caesar, and commands
    The empire of the sea; our slippery people,
    Whose love is never link'd to the deserver
    Pompey the Great and all his dignities
    For the main soldier; whose quality, going on,
    Which, like the courser's hair, hath yet but life
    You do not hold the method to enforce
  CLEOPATRA. Thou teachest like a fool- the way to lose him.
    It cannot be thus long; the sides of nature
  CLEOPATRA. Pray you, stand farther from me.
  ANTONY. What's the matter?
  CLEOPATRA. I know by that same eye there's some good news.
    What says the married woman? You may go.
  CLEOPATRA. O, never was there queen
    So mightily betray'd! Yet at the first
    I saw the treasons planted.
    Though you in swearing shake the throned gods,
    Which break themselves in swearing!
    Then was the time for words. No going then!
    Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world,
    Art turn'd the greatest liar.
    Makes his approaches to the port of Rome;
    Breed scrupulous faction; the hated, grown to strength,
    Rich in his father's honour, creeps apace
    Into the hearts of such as have not thrived
    Upon the present state, whose numbers threaten;
    The garboils she awak'd. At the last, best.
    Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill
    As you shall give th' advice. By the fire
    I prithee turn aside and weep for her;
    Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
    But this is not the best. Look, prithee, Charmian,
    Sir, you and I have lov'd- but there's not it.
    To bear such idleness so near the heart
    Since my becomings kill me when they do not
    And all the gods go with you! Upon your sword
    And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, reading a letter; LEPIDUS, and their train
    This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes
    Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy
    Vouchsaf'd to think he had partners. You shall find there
    A man who is the abstract of all faults
  LEPIDUS. I must not think there are
    His faults, in him, seem as the spots of heaven,
    Rather than purchas'd; what he cannot change
    Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy,
    And keep the turn of tippling with a slave,
    To reel the streets at noon, and stand the buffet
    Whom these things cannot blemish- yet must Antony
    Full surfeits and the dryness of his bones
    Pawn their experience to their present pleasure,
    That only have fear'd Caesar. To the ports
    It hath been taught us from the primal state
    And the ebb'd man, ne'er lov'd till ne'er worth love,
    Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream,
    Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide,
  MESSENGER. Caesar, I bring thee word
    Make the sea serve them, which they ear and wound
    They make in Italy; the borders maritime
    The stale of horses and the gilded puddle
    Which beasts would cough at. Thy palate then did deign
    The roughest berry on the rudest hedge;
    Yea, like the stag when snow the pasture sheets,
    The barks of trees thou brows'd. On the Alps
  CLEOPATRA. Not now to hear thee sing; I take no pleasure
    In aught an eunuch has. 'Tis well for thee
    O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony!
    The demi-Atlas of this earth, the arm
    When thou wast here above the ground, I was
    With his tinct gilded thee.
    He kiss'd- the last of many doubled kisses-
  CLEOPATRA. Mine ear must pluck it thence.
    'Say the firm Roman to great Egypt sends
    To mend the petty present, I will piece
    Her opulent throne with kingdoms. All the East,
  ALEXAS. Like to the time o' th' year between the extremes
    Note him, good Charmian; 'tis the man; but note him!
    That make their looks by his; he was not merry,
    Which seem'd to tell them his remembrance lay
    The violence of either thee becomes,
  CLEOPATRA. Be chok'd with such another emphasis!
    Say 'the brave Antony.'
  CLEOPATRA. By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth
    To say as I said then. But come, away!
  POMPEY. If the great gods be just, they shall assist
    That what they do delay they not deny.
  POMPEY. Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
    Beg often our own harms, which the wise pow'rs
    The people love me, and the sea is mine;
    Of both is flatter'd; but he neither loves,
    Nor either cares for him.
    Are in the field. A mighty strength they carry.
  POMPEY. He dreams. I know they are in Rome together,
    Looking for Antony. But all the charms of love,
    Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts,
    Even till a Lethe'd dullness-
    A space for farther travel.
    Is twice the other twain. But let us rear
    Can from the lap of Egypt's widow pluck
    Caesar and Antony shall well greet together.
    His brother warr'd upon him; although, I think,
    Were't not that we stand up against them all,
    'Twere pregnant they should square between themselves;
    For they have entertained cause enough
    To draw their swords. But how the fear of us
    May cement their divisions, and bind up
    Were I the wearer of Antonius' beard,
    Serves for the matter that is then born in't.
  ENOBARBUS. Not if the small come first.
    The rather for I earnestly beseech,
    Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,
  CAESAR. Nay, then.                                  [They sit]
    Chiefly i' the world; more laugh'd at that I should
    Might be to you in Egypt. Yet, if you there
    By what did here befall me. Your wife and brother
    Made wars upon me, and their contestation
    Was theme for you; you were the word of war.
  ANTONY. You do mistake your business; my brother never
    That drew their swords with you. Did he not rather
    And make the wars alike against my stomach,
    Your partner in the cause 'gainst which he fought,
    I would you had her spirit in such another!
  ENOBARBUS. Would we had all such wives, that the men might go to
    wars with the women!
  CAESAR. To lend me arms and aid when I requir'd them,
  ANTONY. Neglected, rather;
    And then when poisoned hours had bound me up
    I'll play the penitent to you; but mine honesty
    For which myself, the ignorant motive, do
  MAECENAS. If it might please you to enforce no further
    The griefs between ye- to forget them quite
    Were to remember that the present need
  ENOBARBUS. Or, if you borrow one another's love for the instant,
  ANTONY. You wrong this presence; therefore speak no more.
  ENOBARBUS. Go to, then- your considerate stone!
  CAESAR. I do not much dislike the matter, but
    So diff'ring in their acts. Yet if I knew
  AGRIPPA. Thou hast a sister by the mother's side,
    Agrippa further speak.
    To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts
    No worse a husband than the best of men;
    And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
    Would then be nothing. Truths would be tales,
    Would each to other, and all loves to both,
    Further this act of grace; and from this hour
    The heart of brothers govern in our loves
    A sister I bequeath you, whom no brother
  CAESAR. About the Mount Misenum.
  ANTONY. So is the fame.
    Would we had spoke together! Haste we for it.
    Whither straight I'll lead you.
  ENOBARBUS. Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Maecenas! My honourable
    the night light with drinking.
    twelve persons there. Is this true?
    upon the river of Cydnus.
    Burn'd on the water. The poop was beaten gold;
    Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
    The winds were love-sick with them; the oars were silver,
    Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
    The water which they beat to follow faster,
    As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
    To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
    And what they undid did.
  ENOBARBUS. Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
    And made their bends adornings. At the helm
    Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands
    That yarely frame the office. From the barge
    A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
    Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
    Whom ne'er the word of 'No' woman heard speak,
    Being barber'd ten times o'er, goes to the feast,
    Hop forty paces through the public street;
    And, breathless, pow'r breathe forth.
    Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
    Her infinite variety. Other women cloy
    The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry
    Become themselves in her, that the holy priests
Enter ANTONY, CAESAR, OCTAVIA between them
    Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers
    To them for you.
    Read not my blemishes in the world's report.
  SOOTHSAYER. Would I had never come from thence, nor you thither!
    Thy daemon, that thy spirit which keeps thee, is
  SOOTHSAYER. To none but thee; no more but when to thee.
    He beats thee 'gainst the odds. Thy lustre thickens
    Is all afraid to govern thee near him;
  ANTONY. Get thee gone.
    His cocks do win the battle still of mine,
  LEPIDUS. Trouble yourselves no further. Pray you hasten
    As I conceive the journey, be at th' Mount
                    Enter MARDIAN the eunuch
    Their slimy jaws; and as I draw them up
    I'll think them every one an Antony,
    Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed,
    If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here
  CLEOPATRA. Why, there's more gold.
    To say the dead are well. Bring it to that,
    The gold I give thee will I melt and pour
    But there's no goodness in thy face. If Antony
  CLEOPATRA. I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st.
    I'll set thee in a shower of gold, and hail
    Rich pearls upon thee.
  CLEOPATRA. Make thee a fortune from me.
    Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend,
    Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,
    The good and bad together. He's friends with Caesar;
  MESSENGER. For the best turn i' th' bed.
  CLEOPATRA. The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
    I that do bring the news made not the match.
  CLEOPATRA. Say 'tis not so, a province I will give thee,
    And I will boot thee with what gift beside
  MESSENGER. Nay, then I'll run.
  CLEOPATRA. Some innocents scape not the thunderbolt.
    Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again.
    These hands do lack nobility, that they strike
    Have given myself the cause.
                    Enter the MESSENGER again
    Come hither, sir.
    Themselves when they be felt.
    I cannot hate thee worser than I do
  CLEOPATRA. The gods confound thee! Dost thou hold there still?
    A cistern for scal'd snakes! Go, get thee hence.
  CLEOPATRA. O, that his fault should make a knave of thee
    That art not what th'art sure of! Get thee hence.
    Are all too dear for me. Lie they upon thy hand,
    Go to the fellow, good Alexas; bid him
    Report the feature of Octavia, her years,
    The other way's a Mars.                         [To MARDIAN]
at another, CAESAR, ANTONY, LEPIDUS, ENOBARBUS, MAECENAS, AGRIPPA,
    That first we come to words; and therefore have we
    Chief factors for the gods: I do not know
    Wherefore my father should revengers want,
    Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted,
    Made the all-honour'd honest Roman, Brutus,
    With the arm'd rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom,
    To drench the Capitol, but that they would
    Cast on my noble father.
    We'll speak with thee at sea; at land thou know'st
    How much we do o'er-count thee.
    Thou dost o'er-count me of my father's house.
    But since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
    For this is from the present- how you take
  CAESAR. There's the point.
    Rid all the sea of pirates; then to send
  POMPEY. Know, then,
    When Caesar and your brother were at blows,
    Your mother came to Sicily and did find
    That call'd me timelier than my purpose hither;
  CAESAR. That's the next to do.
  POMPEY. We'll feast each other ere we part, and let's
  POMPEY. No, Antony, take the lot;
    Shall have the fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar
    Grew fat with feasting there.
  ANTONY. And fair words to them.
  POMPEY. I know thee now. How far'st thou, soldier?
    I never hated thee; I have seen thee fight,
    It nothing ill becomes thee.
  ALL. Show's the way, sir.
  MENAS. [Aside] Thy father, Pompey, would ne'er have made this
    Menas; if our eyes had authority, here they might take two
  MENAS. All men's faces are true, whatsome'er their hands are.
  ENOBARBUS. But there is never a fair woman has a true face.
  MENAS. No slander: they steal hearts.
  ENOBARBUS. We came hither to fight with you.
  MENAS. True, sir; she was the wife of Caius Marcellus.
  ENOBARBUS. But she is now the wife of Marcus Antonius.
  MENAS. Then is Caesar and he for ever knit together.
  MENAS. I think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage
    than the love of the parties.
  ENOBARBUS. I think so too. But you shall find the band that seems
    to tie their friendship together will be the very strangler of
    their amity: Octavia is of a holy, cold, and still conversation.
    will to his Egyptian dish again; then shall the sighs of Octavia
    blow the fire up in Caesar, and, as I said before, that which is
    the strength of their amity shall prove the immediate author of
    their variance. Antony will use his affection where it is; he
  FIRST SERVANT. Here they'll be, man. Some o' their plants are
    ill-rooted already; the least wind i' th' world will blow them
  SECOND SERVANT. As they pinch one another by the disposition, he
    cries out 'No more!'; reconciles them to his entreaty and himself
  FIRST SERVANT. But it raises the greater war between him and his
    to move in't, are the holes where eyes should be, which pitifully
    disaster the cheeks.
                         with other CAPTAINS
  ANTONY. [To CAESAR] Thus do they, sir: they take the flow o' th'
    By certain scales i' th' pyramid; they know
    By th' height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth
    The more it promises; as it ebbs, the seedsman
    Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain,
  LEPIDUS. Y'have strange serpents there.
  LEPIDUS. Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud by the
    then.
  LEPIDUS. Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies' pyramises are
  MENAS. [Aside to POMPEY] Forsake thy seat, I do beseech thee,
    organs. It lives by that which nourisheth it, and the elements
  ANTONY. 'Tis so. And the tears of it are wet.
  ANTONY. With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a very
  MENAS. [Aside to POMPEY] If for the sake of merit thou wilt hear
    Keep off them, for you sink.
  MENAS. Wilt thou be lord of all the world?
  MENAS. Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That's twice.
    And though you think me poor, I am the man
    Will give thee all the world.
  MENAS. No, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup.
    Thou art, if thou dar'st be, the earthly Jove;
    Whate'er the ocean pales or sky inclips
  MENAS. These three world-sharers, these competitors,
    Are in thy vessel. Let me cut the cable;
    And when we are put off, fall to their throats.
    All there is thine.
    In thee't had been good service. Thou must know
  ENOBARBUS. Here's to thee, Menas!
  POMPEY. Fill till the cup be hid.
               [Pointing to the servant who carries off LEPIDUS]
  ENOBARBUS. 'A bears the third part of the world, man; see'st not?
  MENAS. The third part, then, is drunk. Would it were all,
  ENOBARBUS. Drink thou; increase the reels.
  ANTONY. It ripens towards it. Strike the vessels, ho!
    But I had rather fast from all four days
    Shall we dance now the Egyptian Bacchanals
    Till that the conquering wine hath steep'd our sense
    In soft and delicate Lethe.
    Make battery to our ears with the loud music,
    The while I'll place you; then the boy shall sing;
               [Music plays. ENOBARBUS places them hand in hand]
            Come, thou monarch of the vine,
            Cup us till the world go round,
            Cup us till the world go round!
  CAESAR. What would you more? Pompey, good night. Good brother,
    Is weaker than the wine, and mine own tongue
  POMPEY. I'll try you on the shore.
    You have my father's house- but what? We are friends.
    Come, down into the boat.
    These drums! these trumpets, flutes! what!
    To these great fellows. Sound and be hang'd, sound out!
      and other Romans, OFFICERS and soldiers; the dead body
    Make me revenger. Bear the King's son's body
    Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither
    Shall set thee on triumphant chariots and
    More in their officer, than person. Sossius,
    The soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss
    Without the which a soldier and his sword
  VENTIDIUS. He purposeth to Athens; whither, with what haste
    We shall appear before him.- On, there; pass along.
        Enter AGRIPPA at one door, ENOBARBUS at another
  AGRIPPA. What, are the brothers parted?
    The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps
    With the green sickness.
  ENOBARBUS. Caesar? Why he's the Jupiter of men.
  ENOBARBUS. Spake you of Caesar? How! the nonpareil!
  ENOBARBUS. Would you praise Caesar, say 'Caesar'- go no further.
  AGRIPPA. Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.
  ENOBARBUS. They are his shards, and he their beetle. [Trumpets
  ANTONY. No further, sir.
    As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest band
    Let not the piece of virtue which is set
    Betwixt us as the cement of our love
    To keep it builded be the ram to batter
    Though you be therein curious, the least cause
    For what you seem to fear. So the gods keep you,
    And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends!
  CAESAR. Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well.
    The elements be kind to thee and make
    Thy spirits all of comfort! Fare thee well.
  OCTAVIA. My noble brother!
    And these the showers to bring it on. Be cheerful.
    Her heart inform her tongue- the swan's down feather,
    That stands upon the swell at the full of tide,
    And neither way inclines.
  ENOBARBUS. [Aside to AGRIPPA] He were the worse for that, were he a
    You shall hear from me still; the time shall not
    And give you to the gods.
  LEPIDUS. Let all the number of the stars give light
  CLEOPATRA. Where is the fellow?
                Enter the MESSENGER as before
    Come hither, sir.
    I look'd her in the face, and saw her led
    Between her brother and Mark Antony.
    She shows a body rather than a life,
    A statue than a breather.
  CLEOPATRA. Guess at her years, I prithee.
  CLEOPATRA. For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.
  CLEOPATRA. There's gold for thee.
    I will employ thee back again; I find thee
    Most fit for business. Go make thee ready;
                  Athens. ANTONY'S house
    He vented them, most narrow measure lent me;
    When the best hint was given him, he not took't,
    'O, bless my brother!' Husband win, win brother,
    Prays, and destroys the prayer; no mid-way
    'Twixt these extremes at all.
    I'll raise the preparation of a war
    Shall stain your brother. Make your soonest haste;
    As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
    Should solder up the rift.
    Can equally move with them. Provide your going;
                   Athens. ANTONY'S house
  ENOBARBUS. This is old. What is the success?
  EROS. Caesar, having made use of him in the wars 'gainst Pompey,
    presently denied him rivality, would not let him partake in the
    glory of the action; and not resting here, accuses him of letters
    So the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.
    And throw between them all the food thou hast,
    They'll grind the one the other. Where's Antony?
  EROS. He's walking in the garden- thus, and spurns
    And threats the throat of that his officer
    In Alexandria. Here's the manner of't:
    Were publicly enthron'd; at the feet sat
    Caesarion, whom they call my father's son,
    And all the unlawful issue that their lust
    Since then hath made between them. Unto her
    He gave the stablishment of Egypt; made her
  MAECENAS. This in the public eye?
  CAESAR. I' th' common show-place, where they exercise.
    His sons he there proclaim'd the kings of kings:
    In th' habiliments of the goddess Isis
    Already, will their good thoughts call from him.
    That Lepidus of the triumvirate
    I grant him part; but then, in his Armenia
    And other of his conquer'd kingdoms,
    Demand the like.
  CAESAR. Nor must not then be yielded to in this.
  CAESAR. That ever I should call thee cast-away!
    Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust
    Should have ascended to the roof of heaven,
    And his affairs come to me on the wind.
  OCTAVIA. My lord, in Athens.
    Bocchus, the king of Libya; Archelaus
    Of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas;
    That does afflict each other!
  CAESAR. Welcome hither.
    Be you not troubled with the time, which drives
    O'er your content these strong necessities,
    Hold unbewail'd their way. Welcome to Rome;
    Beyond the mark of thought, and the high gods,
    To do you justice, make their ministers
  CLEOPATRA. I will be even with thee, doubt it not.
  CLEOPATRA. Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars,
    Be there in person?
    If we should serve with horse and mares together
    The horse were merely lost; the mares would bear
    What should not then be spar'd. He is already
  CLEOPATRA. Sink Rome, and their tongues rot
    And, as the president of my kingdom, will
    Appear there for a man. Speak not against it;
    Here comes the Emperor.
    He could so quickly cut the Ionian sea,
    Than by the negligent.
    Which might have well becom'd the best of men
    Where Caesar fought with Pompey. But these offers,
  ENOBARBUS. Most worthy sir, you therein throw away
    And, with the rest full-mann'd, from th' head of Actium
    We then can do't at land.
  ANTONY. Can he be there in person? 'Tis impossible-
    This sword and these my wounds? Let th' Egyptians
    And the Phoenicians go a-ducking; we
    Have us'd to conquer standing on the earth
    Not in the power on't. So our leader's led,
    The legions and the horse whole, do you not?
  CANIDIUS. Well I know the man.
  CANIDIUS. With news the time's with labour and throes forth
                  Another part of the plain
    We may the number of the ships behold,
                 Another part of the plain
        over the stage, and TAURUS, the Lieutenant of
      CAESAR, the other way. After their going in is heard
                   the noise of a sea-fight
    Th' Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,
    With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder.
    All the whole synod of them!
  SCARUS. The greater cantle of the world is lost
  ENOBARBUS. How appears the fight?
  SCARUS. On our side like the token'd pestilence,
    Both as the same, or rather ours the elder-
    Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not
    Endure a further view.
    Leaving the fight in height, flies after her.
  CANIDIUS. Our fortune on the sea is out of breath,
  ENOBARBUS. Ay, are you thereabouts?
    Why then, good night indeed.
  CANIDIUS. Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.
  SCARUS. 'Tis easy to't; and there I will attend
    What further comes.
    Show me the way of yielding.
    Sits in the wind against me.                          Exeunt
  ANTONY. Hark! the land bids me tread no more upon't;
    It is asham'd to bear me. Friends, come hither.
    I am so lated in the world that I
    To run and show their shoulders. Friends, be gone;
    My treasure's in the harbour, take it. O,
    My very hairs do mutiny; for the white
    Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them
    Nor make replies of loathness; take the hint
    Which leaves itself. To the sea-side straight way.
    That the mad Brutus ended; he alone
    In the brave squares of war. Yet now- no matter.
  EROS. The Queen, my lord, the Queen!
  CLEOPATRA. Well then, sustain me. O!
 EROS. Most noble sir, arise; the Queen approaches.
    Your comfort makes the rescue.
  EROS. Sir, the Queen.
  ANTONY. O, whither hast thou led me, Egypt? See
    Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods
    To the young man send humble treaties, dodge
    And palter in the shifts of lowness, who
    With half the bulk o' th' world play'd as I pleas'd,
  ANTONY. Fall not a tear, I say; one of them rates
    Within there, and our viands! Fortune knows
   Enter CAESAR, AGRIPPA, DOLABELLA, THYREUS, with others
    An argument that he is pluck'd, when hither
    As is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf
  EUPHRONIUS. Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and
    He lessens his requests and to thee sues
    To let him breathe between the heavens and earth,
    A private man in Athens. This for him.
    Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves
    The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs,
    Or take his life there. This if she perform,
    She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.
  EUPHRONIUS. Fortune pursue thee!
  CAESAR. Bring him through the bands.           Exit EUPHRONIUS
    In their best fortunes strong; but want will perjure
    Frighted each other? Why should he follow?
    The itch of his affection should not then
    When half to half the world oppos'd, he being
  CLEOPATRA. Prithee, peace.
          Enter EUPHRONIUS, the Ambassador; with ANTONY
  ANTONY. The Queen shall then have courtesy, so she
    To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head,
    And he will fill thy wishes to the brim
  ANTONY. To him again. Tell him he wears the rose
    Of youth upon him; from which the world should note
    Under the service of a child as soon
    As i' th' command of Caesar. I dare him therefore
    A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward
    Do draw the inward quality after them,
    Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will
    Against the blown rose may they stop their nose
    That kneel'd unto the buds. Admit him, sir.     Exit SERVANT
  THYREUS. So, haply, are they friends to Antony.
    Thus then, thou most renown'd: Caesar entreats
    Further than he is Caesar.
  THYREUS. The scars upon your honour, therefore, he
    That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
    Thy dearest quit thee.                                  Exit
    To lay my crown at 's feet, and there to kneel.
    Wisdom and fortune combating together,
    If that the former dare but what it can,
  CLEOPATRA. Your Caesar's father oft,
    The bidding of the fullest man, and worthiest
  ANTONY. Approach there.- Ah, you kite!- Now, gods and devils!
    Whip him. Were't twenty of the greatest tributaries
    That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
    So saucy with the hand of she here- what's her name
    Bring him again: the Jack of Caesar's shall
    Forborne the getting of a lawful race,
    O misery on't!- the wise gods seel our eyes,
    Upon the hill of Basan to outroar
    A halter'd neck which does the hangman thank
  ANTONY. If that thy father live, let him repent
    The white hand of a lady fever thee!
    Shake thou to look on't. Get thee back to Caesar;
    Have empty left their orbs and shot their fires
    And poison it in the source, and the first stone
    Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
    Together with my brave Egyptians all,
    By the discandying of this pelleted storm,
    Lie graveless, till the flies and gnats of Nile
    Have buried them for prey.
    If from the field I shall return once more
    To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood.
    Let's have one other gaudy night. Call to me
    Let's mock the midnight bell.
  ANTONY. Do so, we'll speak to them; and to-night I'll force
    The wine peep through their scars. Come on, my queen,
    Even with his pestilent scythe.     Exeunt all but ENOBARBUS
  ENOBARBUS. Now he'll outstare the lightning. To be furious
    The dove will peck the estridge; and I see still
    It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek
    Caesar to Antony. Let the old ruffian know
    I have many other ways to die, meantime
    Know that to-morrow the last of many battles
    We mean to fight. Within our files there are
    And feast the army; we have store to do't,
    And they have earn'd the waste. Poor Antony!          Exeunt
                     ALEXAS, with others
    Or bathe my dying honour in the blood
    Out of the mind.
    And all of you clapp'd up together in
    May be it is the period of your duty.
    You'll serve another master. I look on you
    And the gods yield you for't!
    To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep;
    Now the witch take me if I meant it thus!
    Where rather I'll expect victorious life
  FIRST SOLDIER. Brother, good night. To-morrow is the day.
    Heard you of nothing strange about the streets?
                                      [They meet other soldiers]
                [The two companies separate and place themselves
                                   in every corner of the stage]
                      [Music of the hautboys is under the stage]
  FOURTH SOLDIER. Under the earth.
  SECOND SOLDIER. 'Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony lov'd,
  THIRD SOLDIER. Walk; let's see if other watchmen
  SOLDIERS. [Speaking together] How now!
  FIRST SOLDIER. Follow the noise so far as we have quarter;
                          with others
    Good-morrow to thee. Welcome.
    Early though't be, have on their riveted trim,
    And at the port expect you.
    This morning, like the spirit of a youth
    Fare thee well, dame, whate'er becomes of me.
    On more mechanic compliment; I'll leave thee
                       meeting them
    The kings that have revolted, and the soldier
    That has this morning left thee, would have still
    One ever near thee. Call for Enobarbus,
    He shall not hear thee; or from Caesar's camp
    Detain no jot, I charge thee. Write to him-
  CAESAR. Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight.
    Prove this a prosp'rous day, the three-nook'd world
    Shall bear the olive freely.
    Is come into the field.
    Plant those that have revolted in the vant,
    Affairs of Antony; there did dissuade
    Casaer hath hang'd him. Canidius and the rest
    Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with
    I tell you true. Best you saf'd the bringer
    Out of the host. I must attend mine office,
  ENOBARBUS. I am alone the villain of the earth,
    I fight against thee? No! I will go seek
    Some ditch wherein to die; the foul'st best fits
             Field of battle between the camps
                        and others
    Had we done so at first, we had droven them home
    With clouts about their heads.
  SCARUS. Let us score their backs
  ANTONY. I will reward thee
    For thy good valour. Come thee on.
               Under the walls of Alexandria
                        with others
    And let the Queen know of our gests. To-morrow,
    Before the sun shall see's, we'll spill the blood
    Not as you serv'd the cause, but as't had been
    Enter the city, clip your wives, your friends,
    Tell them your feats; whilst they with joyful tears
    Wash the congealment from your wounds and kiss
    Make her thanks bless thee. O thou day o' th' world,
    Through proof of harness to my heart, and there
    Ride on the pants triumphing.
    We have beat them to their beds. What, girl! though grey
  CLEOPATRA. I'll give thee, friend,
    Bear our hack'd targets like the men that owe them.
    Had our great palace the capacity
    To camp this host, we all would sup together,
    And drink carouses to the next day's fate,
    With brazen din blast you the city's ear;
    That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together
    Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle
    Hark further.
    Against the flint and hardness of my fault,
    But let the world rank me in register
  CENTURION. Let's hear him, for the things he speaks
  CENTURION. Swoons rather; for so bad a prayer as his
    [Drums afar off ] Hark! the drums
    Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him
  SECOND WATCH. Come on, then;
    He may recover yet.                     Exeunt with the body
                    Between the two camps
            Enter ANTONY and SCARUS, with their army
    We please them not by land.
  ANTONY. I would they'd fight i' th' fire or i' th' air;
    We'd fight there too. But this it is, our foot
    Upon the hills adjoining to the city
    They have put forth the haven-
    Where their appointment we may best discover
    And look on their endeavour.                          Exeunt
                    Between the camps
    Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales,
  ANTONY. Yet they are not join'd. Where yond pine does stand
    I shall discover all. I'll bring thee word
    In Cleopatra's sails their nests. The augurers
    Say they know not, they cannot tell; look grimly,
    And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony
    My fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder
    They cast their caps up and carouse together
    Makes only wars on thee. Bid them all fly;
    I have done all. Bid them all fly; begone.       Exit SCARUS
    Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets
    That overtopp'd them all. Betray'd I am.
    Whose eye beck'd forth my wars and call'd them home,
    Beguil'd me to the very heart of loss.
  ANTONY. Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving
    And blemish Caesar's triumph. Let him take thee
    And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians;
    Follow his chariot, like the greatest spot
    Let me lodge Lichas on the horns o' th' moon,
    And with those hands that grasp'd the heaviest club
    To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I fall
    Than Telamon for his shield; the boar of Thessaly
    Say that the last I spoke was 'Antony'
    And word it, prithee, piteously. Hence, Mardian,
    With trees upon't that nod unto the world
    And mock our eyes with air. Thou hast seen these signs;
    I made these wars for Egypt; and the Queen-
    Nay, weep not, gentle Eros; there is left us
    My mistress lov'd thee, and her fortunes mingled
    She hath betray'd me, and shall die the death.
    Then in the midst a tearing groan did break
  ANTONY. Dead then?
  ANTONY. Unarm, Eros; the long day's task is done,
    I will o'ertake thee, Cleopatra, and
    All length is torture. Since the torch is out,
    Lie down, and stray no farther. Now all labour
    Itself with strength. Seal then, and all is done.
    And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze.
    And all the haunt be ours.- Come, Eros, Eros!
    I have liv'd in such dishonour that the gods
    Quarter'd the world, and o'er green Neptune's back
    That, when the exigent should come- which now
    Thou then wouldst kill me. Do't; the time is come.
    Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts,
    To penetrative shame, whilst the wheel'd seat
  ANTONY. Come, then; for with a wound I must be cur'd.
  ANTONY. When I did make thee free, swor'st thou not then
    To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once,
  EROS. Turn from me then that noble countenance,
    Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.
  ANTONY. Lo thee!                            [Turning from him]
  EROS. Why, there then! Thus do I escape the sorrow
    Have, by their brave instruction, got upon me
    As to a lover's bed. Come, then; and, Eros,
    I learn'd of thee. How? not dead? not dead?-
  FIRST GUARD. What's the noise?
  DERCETAS. There, Diomed, there.
  ANTONY. Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword and give me
    My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.
  ANTONY. When did she send thee?
    Me to proclaim the truth; and I am come,
  ANTONY. Too late, good Diomed. Call my guard, I prithee.
  DIOMEDES. What, ho! the Emperor's guard! The guard, what ho!
             Enter four or five of the guard of ANTONY
    'Tis the last service that I shall command you.
    Look out o' th' other side your monument;
    His guard have brought him thither.
            Enter, below, ANTONY, borne by the guard
    Burn the great sphere thou mov'st in! Darkling stand
    Help, friends below! Let's draw him hither.
    Of many thousand kisses the poor last
    Of the full-fortun'd Caesar ever shall
    Help me, my women- we must draw thee up;
    That makes the weight. Had I great Juno's power,
    The strong-wing'd Mercury should fetch thee up,
    And set thee by Jove's side. Yet come a little.
    Thus would I wear them out.
    That the false huswife Fortune break her wheel,
  CLEOPATRA. They do not go together.
    In feeding them with those my former fortunes
    Wherein I liv'd the greatest prince o' th' world,
    O, wither'd is the garland of the war,
    And there is nothing left remarkable
    Beneath the visiting moon.                          [Swoons]
    By such poor passion as the maid that milks
    And does the meanest chares. It were for me
    To throw my sceptre at the injurious gods;
    To tell them that this world did equal theirs
    Till they had stol'n our jewel. All's but nought;
    To rush into the secret house of death
    We'll bury him; and then, what's brave, what's noble,
    Let's do it after the high Roman fashion,
    But resolution and the briefest end.
          PROCULEIUS, and others, his Council of War
             Enter DERCETAS With the sword of ANTONY
    To take me to thee, as I was to him
    I yield thee up my life.
    And citizens to their dens. The death of Antony
    Is not a single doom; in the name lay
    A moiety of the world.
    Which writ his honour in the acts it did
    Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it,
    Splitted the heart. This is his sword;
    To wash the eyes of kings.
    I have follow'd thee to this! But we do lance
    Have shown to thee such a declining day
    Or look on thine; we could not stall together
    In the whole world. But yet let me lament,
    With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts,
    That thou, my brother, my competitor
    Friend and companion in the front of war,
    The arm of mine own body, and the heart
  EGYPTIAN. A poor Egyptian, yet the Queen, my mistress,
  EGYPTIAN. So the gods preserve thee!                      Exit
  CAESAR. Come hither, Proculeius. Go and say
    To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
    Which sleeps, and never palates more the dug,
       Enter, to the gates of the monument, PROCULEIUS, GALLUS,
  PROCULEIUS. Caesar sends greetings to the Queen of Egypt,
    And bids thee study on what fair demands
    Thou mean'st to have him grant thee.
      Here PROCULEIUS and two of the guard ascend the
       and come behind CLEOPATRA. Some of the guard
                unbar and open the gates
    Th' undoing of yourself. Let the world see
    Come hither, come! Come, come, and take a queen
    I'll not sleep neither. This mortal house I'll ruin,
    Nor once be chastis'd with the sober eye
    Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up,
    And show me to the shouting varletry
    Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt
    Be gentle grave unto me! Rather on Nilus' mud
    Lay me stark-nak'd, and let the water-flies
    Blow me into abhorring! Rather make
    These thoughts of horror further than you shall
    And he hath sent for thee. For the Queen,
    You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams;
  CLEOPATRA. I dreamt there was an Emperor Antony-
    O, such another sleep, that I might see
    But such another man!
  CLEOPATRA. His face was as the heav'ns, and therein stuck
    A sun and moon, which kept their course and lighted
    The little O, the earth.
  CLEOPATRA. His legs bestrid the ocean; his rear'd arm
    Crested the world. His voice was propertied
    As all the tuned spheres, and that to friends;
    But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,
    That grew the more by reaping. His delights
    Were dolphin-like: they show'd his back above
    The element they liv'd in. In his livery
  CLEOPATRA. Think you there was or might be such a man
  CLEOPATRA. You lie, up to the hearing of the gods.
    But if there be nor ever were one such,
    It's past the size of drearning. Nature wants stuff
    As answering to the weight. Would I might never
    By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites
  CLEOPATRA. He'll lead me, then, in triumph?
                              [Within: 'Make way there-Caesar!']
                     and others of his train
  CAESAR. Which is the Queen of Egypt?
  DOLABELLA. It is the Emperor, madam.        [CLEOPATPA kneels]
  CLEOPATRA. Sir, the gods
    We will extenuate rather than enforce.
    To that destruction which I'll guard them from,
    If thereon you rely. I'll take my leave.
  CLEOPATRA. And may, through all the world. 'Tis yours, and we,
  CLEOPATRA. This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels,
    To myself nothing. Speak the truth, Seleucus.
    I had rather seal my lips than to my peril
    Your wisdom in the deed.
    Go back, I warrant thee; but I'll catch thine eyes
    Though they had wings. Slave, soulless villain, dog!
    Doing the honour of thy lordliness
    Parcel the sum of my disgraces by
    Beneath the fall I have. [To SELEUCUS] Prithee go hence;
    Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits
  CLEOPATRA. Be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought
    For things that others do; and when we fall
    We answer others' merits in our name,
    Are therefore to be pitied.
    Be noble to myself. But hark thee, Charmian!
  IRAS. Finish, good lady; the bright day is done,
    And we are for the dark.
  CLEOPATRA. Hie thee again.
    Go put it to the haste.
  DOLABELLA. Where's the Queen?
  DOLABELLA. Madam, as thereto sworn by your command,
    Uplift us to the view; in their thick breaths,
    And forc'd to drink their vapour.
    Ballad us out o' tune; the quick comedians
  IRAS. O the good gods!
  CLEOPATRA. Why, that's the way
    To fool their preparation and to conquer
    And when thou hast done this chare, I'll give thee leave
    I am marble-constant; now the fleeting moon
  GUARDSMAN. This is the man.
    Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there
  CLOWN. Truly, I have him. But I would not be the party that should
  CLOWN. Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of them no
    to lie, as a woman should not do but in the way of honesty; how
    she died of the biting of it, what pain she felt- truly she makes
    they say shall never be saved by half that they do. But this is
    most falliable, the worm's an odd worm.
  CLEOPATRA. Get thee hence; farewell.
  CLOWN. I wish you all joy of the worm.
                                          [Sets down the basket]
  CLOWN. You must think this, look you, that the worm will do his
  CLOWN. Look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the keeping
    of wise people; for indeed there is no goodness in the worm.
    the feeding.
  CLOWN. You must not think I am so simple but I know the devil
    the gods, if the devil dress her not. But truly, these same
    whoreson devils do the gods great harm in their women, for in
    every ten that they make the devils mar five.
  CLEOPATRA. Well, get thee gone; farewell.
    The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men
    To excuse their after wrath. Husband, I come.
    I am fire and air; my other elements
    Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.
                              [Kisses them. IRAS falls and dies]
    Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall?
    If thou vanishest, thou tell'st the world
    The gods themselves do weep.
    If she first meet the curled Antony,
    That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass
    That sucks the nurse asleep?
    O Antony! Nay, I will take thee too:
                               [Applying another asp to her arm]
  CHARMIAN. In this vile world? So, fare thee well.
    Now boast thee, death, in thy possession lies
    I'll mend it and then play-
                  Enter the guard, rushing in
  FIRST GUARD. Where's the Queen?
    O, come apace, dispatch. I partly feel thee.
    Touch their effects in this. Thyself art coming
    To see perform'd the dreaded act which thou
                      [Within: 'A way there, a way for Caesar!']
  CAESAR. Bravest at the last,
    Took her own way. The manner of their deaths?
    I do not see them bleed.
  DOLABELLA. Who was last with them?
  CAESAR. Poison'd then.
    I found her trimming up the diadem
    And on the sudden dropp'd.
    If they had swallow'd poison 'twould appear
    As she would catch another Antony
  FIRST GUARD. This is an aspic's trail; and these fig-leaves
    Have slime upon them, such as th' aspic leaves
    Upon the caves of Nile.
    And bear her women from the monument.
    No grave upon the earth shall clip in it
    A pair so famous. High events as these
    Strike those that make them; and their story is
    Brought them to be lamented. Our army shall
    And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see
  FREDERICK, his brother, and usurper of his dominions
  AMIENS, lord attending on the banished Duke
  TOUCHSTONE, the court jester
  ROSALIND, daughter to the banished Duke
OLIVER'S house; FREDERICK'S court; and the Forest of Arden
  ORLANDO. As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed
    charged my brother, on his blessing, to breed me well; and there
    begins my sadness. My brother Jaques he keeps at school, and
    birth that differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses are
    bred better; for, besides that they are fair with their feeding,
    they are taught their manage, and to that end riders dearly
    hir'd; but I, his brother, gain nothing under him but growth; for
    the which his animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him
    as I. Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me, the
    me. He lets me feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a
    brother, and as much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my
    education. This is it, Adam, that grieves me; and the spirit of
    my father, which I think is within me, begins to mutiny against
  ADAM. Yonder comes my master, your brother.
  OLIVER. What mar you then, sir?
    poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.
  ORLANDO. Shall I keep your hogs, and eat husks with them? What
    my eldest brother; and in the gentle condition of blood, you
    in that you are the first-born; but the same tradition takes not
    away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt us. I have as
    much of my father in me as you, albeit I confess your coming
  ORLANDO. Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this.
  ORLANDO. I am no villain; I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de
    Boys. He was my father; and he is thrice a villain that says such
    a father begot villains. Wert thou not my brother, I would not
    take this hand from thy throat till this other had pull'd out thy
  ADAM. [Coming forward] Sweet masters, be patient; for your father's
  ORLANDO. I will not, till I please; you shall hear me. My father
    gentleman-like qualities. The spirit of my father grows strong in
    me, and I will no longer endure it; therefore allow me such
    exercises as may become a gentleman, or give me the poor
    allottery my father left me by testament; with that I will go buy
  ORLANDO. I no further offend you than becomes me for my good.
    your rankness, and yet give no thousand crowns neither. Holla,
  OLIVER. not Charles, the Duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?
  DENNIS. So please you, he is here at the door and importunes access
    to-morrow the wrestling is.
  OLIVER. Good Monsieur Charles! What's the new news at the new
  CHARLES. There's no news at the court, sir, but the old news; that
    is, the old Duke is banished by his younger brother the new Duke;
    and three or four loving lords have put themselves into voluntary
    exile with him, whose lands and revenues enrich the new Duke;
    therefore he gives them good leave to wander.
  OLIVER. Can you tell if Rosalind, the Duke's daughter, be banished
    with her father?
  CHARLES. O, no; for the Duke's daughter, her cousin, so loves her,
    being ever from their cradles bred together, that she would have
    the court, and no less beloved of her uncle than his own
    daughter; and never two ladies loved as they do.
  OLIVER. Where will the old Duke live?
  CHARLES. They say he is already in the Forest of Arden, and a many
    merry men with him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood
    and fleet the time carelessly, as they did in the golden world.
  OLIVER. What, you wrestle to-morrow before the new Duke?
    brother, Orlando, hath a disposition to come in disguis'd against
    Your brother is but young and tender; and, for your love, I would
    in; therefore, out of my love to you, I came hither to acquaint
    you withal, that either you might stay him from his intendment,
    thing of his own search and altogether against my will.
  OLIVER. Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt
    brother's purpose herein, and have by underhand means laboured to
    dissuade him from it; but he is resolute. I'll tell thee,
    Charles, it is the stubbornest young fellow of France; full of
    and villainous contriver against me his natural brother.
    himself on thee, he will practise against thee by poison, entrap
    thee by some treacherous device, and never leave thee till he
    hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other; for, I
    assure thee, and almost with tears I speak it, there is not one
    so young and so villainous this day living. I speak but brotherly
    of him; but should I anatomize him to thee as he is, I must blush
  CHARLES. I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he come
    beloved; and, indeed, so much in the heart of the world, and
    altogether misprised. But it shall not be so long; this wrestler
    shall clear all. Nothing remains but that I kindle the boy
    thither, which now I'll go about.                       Exit
A lawn before the DUKE'S palace
  CELIA. I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.
    a banished father, you must not learn me how to remember any
  CELIA. Herein I see thou lov'st me not with the full weight that I
    love thee. If my uncle, thy banished father, had banished thy
    uncle, the Duke my father, so thou hadst been still with me, I
    could have taught my love to take thy father for mine; so wouldst
    thou, if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously temper'd
    as mine is to thee.
  ROSALIND. Well, I will forget the condition of my estate, to
  CELIA. You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is like to
    he hath taken away from thy father perforce, I will render thee
    oath, let me turn monster; therefore, my sweet Rose, my dear
  CELIA. Marry, I prithee, do, to make sport withal; but love no man
    in good earnest, nor no further in sport neither than with safety
  ROSALIND. What shall be our sport, then?
  CELIA. Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from her
    misplaced; and the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her
    Fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments of
    Fortune fall into the fire? Though Nature hath given us wit to
    the argument?
  ROSALIND. Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature, when
    Fortune makes Nature's natural the cutter-off of Nature's wit.
  CELIA. Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither, but
    always the dullness of the fool is the whetstone of the wits. How
    now, wit! Whither wander you?
  TOUCHSTONE. Mistress, you must come away to your father.
  CELIA. Were you made the messenger?
  TOUCHSTONE. Of a certain knight that swore by his honour they were
    good pancakes, and swore by his honour the mustard was naught.
    Now I'll stand to it, the pancakes were naught and the mustard
    was good, and yet was not the knight forsworn.
  CELIA. How prove you that, in the great heap of your knowledge?
  CELIA. By our beards, if we had them, thou art.
  TOUCHSTONE. By my knavery, if I had it, then I were. But if you
  CELIA. Prithee, who is't that thou mean'st?
  TOUCHSTONE. One that old Frederick, your father, loves.
  CELIA. My father's love is enough to honour him. Enough, speak no
    more of him; you'll be whipt for taxation one of these days.
  CELIA. By my troth, thou sayest true; for since the little wit that
    fools have was silenced, the little foolery that wise men have
  CELIA. Which he will put on us as pigeons feed their young.
  CELIA. All the better; we shall be the more marketable. Bon jour,
    Monsieur Le Beau. What's the news?
  TOUCHSTONE. Or as the Destinies decrees.
    wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.
  ROSALIND. Yet tell us the manner of the wrestling.
  LE BEAU. I will tell you the beginning, and, if it please your
    ladyships, you may see the end; for the best is yet to do; and
    here, where you are, they are coming to perform it.
  CELIA. Well, the beginning, that is dead and buried.
  ROSALIND. With bills on their necks: 'Be it known unto all men by
    these presents'-
  LE BEAU. The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles, the Duke's
    his ribs, that there is little hope of life in him. So he serv'd
    the second, and so the third. Yonder they lie; the poor old man,
    their father, making such pitiful dole over them that all the
  TOUCHSTONE. But what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies have
  TOUCHSTONE. Thus men may grow wiser every day. It is the first time
  CELIA. Or I, I promise thee.
  ROSALIND. But is there any else longs to see this broken music in
    his sides? Is there yet another dotes upon rib-breaking? Shall we
  LE BEAU. You must, if you stay here; for here is the place
    appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to perform it.
  CELIA. Yonder, sure, they are coming. Let us now stay and see it.
  FREDERICK. Come on; since the youth will not be entreated, his own
  ROSALIND. Is yonder the man?
  FREDERICK. How now, daughter and cousin! Are you crept hither to
    see the wrestling?
    there is such odds in the man. In pity of the challenger's youth
  CELIA. Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.
  LE BEAU. Monsieur the Challenger, the Princess calls for you.
  ORLANDO. I attend them with all respect and duty.
  ROSALIND. Young man, have you challeng'd Charles the wrestler?
  ORLANDO. No, fair Princess; he is the general challenger. I come
    but in, as others do, to try with him the strength of my youth.
    yourself with your eyes, or knew yourself with your judgment, the
  ROSALIND. Do, young sir; your reputation shall not therefore be
    misprised: we will make it our suit to the Duke that the
    with me to my trial; wherein if I be foil'd there is but one
    to lament me; the world no injury, for in it I have nothing; only
    in the world I fill up a place, which may be better supplied when
    lie with his mother earth?
  CELIA. I would I were invisible, to catch the strong fellow by the
  ORLANDO. Orlando, my liege; the youngest son of Sir Rowland de
    The world esteem'd thy father honourable,
    Hadst thou descended from another house.
    But fare thee well; thou art a gallant youth;
    I would thou hadst told me of another father.
  CELIA. Were I my father, coz, would I do this?
  ROSALIND. My father lov'd Sir Rowland as his soul,
    And all the world was of my father's mind;
    My father's rough and envious disposition
  ORLANDO. What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
    Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.
    Yet such is now the Duke's condition
    Which of the two was daughter of the Duke
    That here was at the wrestling?
  LE BEAU. Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners;
    But yet, indeed, the smaller is his daughter;
    The other is daughter to the banish'd Duke,
    Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
    Grounded upon no other argument
    But that the people praise her for her virtues
    And pity her for her good father's sake;
    And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady
    Thus must I from the smoke into the smother;
    From tyrant Duke unto a tyrant brother.
    throw some of them at me; come, lame me with reasons.
  ROSALIND. Then there were two cousins laid up, when the one should
    be lam'd with reasons and the other mad without any.
  CELIA. But is all this for your father?
  ROSALIND. No, some of it is for my child's father. O, how full of
  CELIA. They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday
    foolery; if we walk not in the trodden paths, our very petticoats
    will catch them.
  ROSALIND. I could shake them off my coat: these burs are in my
  CELIA. Hem them away.
  ROSALIND. O, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself.
    a fall. But, turning these jests out of service, let us talk in
  ROSALIND. The Duke my father lov'd his father dearly.
  CELIA. Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly?
    By this kind of chase I should hate him, for my father hated his
    father dearly; yet I hate not Orlando.
    do. Look, here comes the Duke.
    Within these ten days if that thou beest found
    Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me.
    As I do trust I am not- then, dear uncle,
    If their purgation did consist in words,
    Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
    Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.
  FREDERICK. Thou art thy father's daughter; there's enough.
    What's that to me? My father was no traitor.
    Else had she with her father rang'd along.
  CELIA. I did not then entreat to have her stay;
    Why so am I: we still have slept together,
    Rose at an instant, learn'd, play'd, eat together;
  FREDERICK. She is too subtle for thee; and her smoothness,
    Speak to the people, and they pity her.
    Thou art a fool. She robs thee of thy name;
  CELIA. Pronounce that sentence, then, on me, my liege;
    If you outstay the time, upon mine honour,
    And in the greatness of my word, you die.
  CELIA. O my poor Rosalind! Whither wilt thou go?
    Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
    I charge thee be not thou more griev'd than I am.
    Prithee be cheerful. Know'st thou not the Duke
  CELIA. No, hath not? Rosalind lacks, then, the love
    Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one.
    No; let my father seek another heir.
    Whither to go, and what to bear with us;
    Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.
  ROSALIND. Why, whither shall we go?
  CELIA. To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden.
    Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will-
    As many other mannish cowards have
    That do outface it with their semblances.
  CELIA. What shall I call thee when thou art a man?
    And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
    The clownish fool out of your father's court?
  CELIA. He'll go along o'er the wide world with me;
    And get our jewels and our wealth together;
    Devise the fittest time and safest way
  DUKE SENIOR. Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
    Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
    More free from peril than the envious court?
    Here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
    The seasons' difference; as the icy fang
    And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
    'This is no flattery; these are counsellors
    Sweet are the uses of adversity,
    Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
    Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
    That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
    And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
    Should, in their own confines, with forked heads
    Have their round haunches gor'd.
    Than doth your brother that hath banish'd you.
    Upon the brook that brawls along this wood!
    To the which place a poor sequest'red stag,
    That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,
    That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
    Almost to bursting; and the big round tears
    Cours'd one another down his innocent nose
    In piteous chase; and thus the hairy fool,
    Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
    Stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook,
    First, for his weeping into the needless stream:
    To that which had too much.' Then, being there alone,
    Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
    'Tis just the fashion. Wherefore do you look
    Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?'
    The body of the country, city, court,
    To fright the animals, and to kill them up
    In their assign'd and native dwelling-place.
    Upon the sobbing deer.
  DUKE SENIOR. Show me the place;
    I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
    For then he's full of matter.
  FREDERICK. Can it be possible that no man saw them?
    Saw her abed, and in the morning early
    They found the bed untreasur'd of their mistress.
  SECOND LORD. My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft
    Hisperia, the Princess' gentlewoman,
    The parts and graces of the wrestler
    That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles;
    And she believes, wherever they are gone,
    That youth is surely in their company.
  FREDERICK. Send to his brother; fetch that gallant hither.
    If he be absent, bring his brother to me;
    To bring again these foolish runaways.                Exeunt
  ORLANDO. Who's there?
    The bonny prizer of the humorous Duke?
    Their graces serve them but as enemies?
  ORLANDO. Why, what's the matter?
    Come not within these doors; within this roof
    Your brother- no, no brother; yet the son-
    Yet not the son; I will not call him son
    Of him I was about to call his father-
    To burn the lodging where you use to lie,
    He will have other means to cut you off;
  ORLANDO. Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?
  ADAM. No matter whither, so you come not here.
    A thievish living on the common road?
    I rather will subject me to the malice
    Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
    The thrifty hire I sav'd under your father,
    Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
    Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
    Be comfort to my age! Here is the gold;
    I'll do the service of a younger man
  ORLANDO. O good old man, how well in thee appears
    The constant service of the antique world,
    Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
    And having that do choke their service up
    Even with the having; it is not so with thee.
    But come thy ways, we'll go along together,
  ADAM. Master, go on; and I will follow the
    To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty.
    At seventeen years many their fortunes seek,
    and to cry like a woman; but I must comfort the weaker vessel, as
    therefore, courage, good Aliena.
  CELIA. I pray you bear with me; I cannot go no further.
  TOUCHSTONE. For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear you;
  ROSALIND. Well,. this is the Forest of Arden.
  TOUCHSTONE. Ay, now am I in Arden; the more fool I; when I was at
  CORIN. That is the way to make her scorn you still.
  SILVIUS. O, thou didst then never love so heartily!
    If thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly
    That ever love did make thee run into,
    Jane Smile; and I remember the kissing of her batler, and the
    the wooing of  peascod instead of her; from whom I took two cods,
    and giving her them again, said with weeping tears 'Wear these
  CORIN. Else are they very wretched.
  ROSALIND. I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold
    But I am shepherd to another man,
    And do not shear the fleeces that I graze.
    And little recks to find the way to heaven
    By reason of his absence, there is nothing
  ROSALIND. I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
    Buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock,
  CORIN. Assuredly the thing is to be sold.
    The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,
Another part of the forest
  AMIENS.    Under the greenwood tree
               Unto the sweet bird's throat,
             Come hither, come hither, come hither.
             But winter and rough weather.
  JAQUES. More, more, I prithee, more.
  JAQUES. I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck melancholy
    out of a song, as a weasel sucks eggs. More, I prithee, more.
    Come, more; another stanzo. Call you 'em stanzos?
  JAQUES. Nay, I care not for their names; they owe me nothing. Will
  JAQUES. Well then, if ever I thank any man, I'll thank you; but
    that they call compliment is like th' encounter of two dog-apes;
    penny, and he renders me the beggarly thanks. Come, sing; and you
  AMIENS. Well, I'll end the song. Sirs, cover the while; the Duke
    I give heaven thanks, and make no boast of them. Come, warble,
              [All together here]
           Seeking the food he eats,
         Come hither, come hither, come hither.
           But winter and rough weather.
    go sleep, if I can; if I cannot, I'll rail against all the
  AMIENS. And I'll go seek the Duke; his banquet is prepar'd.
  ADAM. Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for food! Here lie
  ORLANDO. Why, how now, Adam! No greater heart in thee? Live a
    forest yield anything savage, I will either be food for it or
    bring it for food to thee. Thy conceit is nearer death than thy
    powers. For my sake be comfortable; hold death awhile at the
    arm's end. I will here be with the presently; and if I bring thee
    not something to eat, I will give thee leave to die; but if thou
    thou look'st cheerly; and I'll be with thee quickly. Yet thou
    liest in the bleak air. Come, I will bear thee to some shelter;
    and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner, if there live
    We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
    Who laid him down and bask'd him in the sun,
    And then he drew a dial from his poke,
    Thus we may see,' quoth he, 'how the world wags;
    And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot;
    And thereby hangs a tale.' When I did hear
    The motley fool thus moral on the time,
    A worthy fool! Motley's the only wear.
    They have the gift to know it; and in his brain,
    Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
    With observation, the which he vents
    Of all opinion that grows rank in them
    Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
    And they that are most galled with my folly,
    They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
    Not to seem senseless of the bob; if not,
    Even by the squand'ring glances of the fool.
    Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world,
    If they will patiently receive my medicine.
  DUKE SENIOR. Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.
    As sensual as the brutish sting itself;
    Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.
    That can therein tax any private party?
    Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea,
    Till that the wearer's very means do ebb?
    What woman in the city do I name
    When that I say the city-woman bears
    Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
    His folly to the mettle of my speech?
    There then! how then? what then? Let me see wherein
    Why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies,
  ORLANDO. You touch'd my vein at first: the thorny point
    Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show
    And therefore put I on the countenance
    Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
    Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time;
    In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.
    And therefore sit you down in gentleness,
    This wide and universal theatre
    Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
  JAQUES. All the world's a stage,
    And all the men and women merely players;
    They have their exits and their entrances;
    His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
    Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms;
    Then the whining school-boy, with his satchel
    Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
    Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard,
    Seeking the bubble reputation
    Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
    Into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon,
    Heigh-ho! sing heigh-ho! unto the green holly.
            Then, heigh-ho, the holly!
            Though thou the waters warp,
  DUKE SENIOR. If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son,
    Be truly welcome hither. I am the Duke
    That lov'd your father. The residue of your fortune,
    Support him by the arm. Give me your hand,
    But were I not the better part made mercy,
    Find out thy brother wheresoe'er he is;
    Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth
    Of what we think against thee.
    I never lov'd my brother in my life.
  ORLANDO. Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love;
    O Rosalind! these trees shall be my books,
    And in their barks my thoughts I'll character,
    The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.             Exit
    respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me well; but in respect
    it is not in the court, it is tedious. As it is a spare life,
    look you, it fits my humour well; but as there is no more plenty
    thee, shepherd?
  CORIN. No more but that I know the more one sickens the worse at
    without three good friends; that the property of rain is to wet,
    great cause of the night is lack of the sun; that he that hath
    manners; if thou never saw'st good manners, then thy manners must
  CORIN. Not a whit, Touchstone. Those that are good manners at the
    court are as ridiculous in the country as the behaviour of the
    country is most mockable at the court. You told me you salute not
    at the court, but you kiss your hands; that courtesy would be
  CORIN. Why, we are still handling our ewes; and their fells, you
  TOUCHSTONE. Why, do not your courtier's hands sweat? And is not the
    grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of a man? Shallow,
  TOUCHSTONE. Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow again. A
  CORIN. And they are often tarr'd over with the surgery of our
    piece of flesh indeed! Learn of the wise, and perpend: civet is
    of a baser birth than tar- the very uncleanly flux of a cat. Mend
    the instance, shepherd.
  TOUCHSTONE. Wilt thou rest damn'd? God help thee, shallow man! God
    make incision in thee! thou art raw.
    wear; owe no man hate, envy no man's happiness; glad of other
    men's good, content with my harm; and the greatest of my pride is
  TOUCHSTONE. That is another simple sin in you: to bring the ewes
    and the rams together, and to offer to get your living by the
    copulation of cattle; to be bawd to a bell-wether, and to betray
    the devil himself will have no shepherds; I cannot see else how
  CORIN. Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistress's brother.
  ROSALIND.   'From the east to western Inde,
              Her worth, being mounted on the wind,
              Through all the world bears Rosalinde.
              All the pictures fairest lin'd
              But the fair of Rosalinde.'
  TOUCHSTONE. I'll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners, and
    suppers, and sleeping hours, excepted. It is the right
                If the cat will after kind,
    This is the very false gallop of verses; why do you infect
    yourself with them?
  ROSALIND. Peace, you dull fool! I found them on a tree.
  TOUCHSTONE. Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.
  ROSALIND. I'll graff it with you, and then I shall graff it with a
    medlar. Then it will be the earliest fruit i' th' country; for
    you'll be rotten ere you be half ripe, and that's the right
    virtue of the medlar.
  TOUCHSTONE. You have said; but whether wisely or no, let the forest
           Some, how brief the life of man
           That the streching of a span
             'Twixt the souls of friend and friend;
           But upon the fairest boughs,
             To have the touches dearest priz'd.
           Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
  CELIA. Didst thou hear these verses?
  ROSALIND. O, yes, I heard them all, and more too; for some of them
    had in them more feet than the verses would bear.
  CELIA. That's no matter; the feet might bear the verses.
  ROSALIND. Ay, but the feet were lame, and could not bear themselves
    without the verse, and therefore stood lamely in the verse.
    hang'd and carved upon these trees?
  ROSALIND. I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder before you
  ROSALIND. I prithee, who?
  ROSALIND. Nay, I prithee now, with most petitionary vehemence, tell
    I prithee tell me who is it quickly, and speak apace. I would
    either too much at once or none at all. I prithee take the cork
  ROSALIND. Why, God will send more if the man will be thankful. Let
    me stay the growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the
  CELIA. It is young Orlando, that tripp'd up the wrestler's heels
  ROSALIND. Nay, but the devil take mocking! Speak sad brow and true
  ROSALIND. Alas the day! what shall I do with my doublet and hose?
    remains he? How parted he with thee? And when shalt thou see him
    great for any mouth of this age's size. To say ay and no to these
    apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled?
  CELIA. It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
    the ground.
  CELIA. Cry 'Holla' to thy tongue, I prithee; it curvets
    their barks.
  ORLANDO. I pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them
    acquainted with goldsmiths' wives, and conn'd them out of rings?
    our mistress the world, and all our misery.
  ORLANDO. I will chide no breather in the world but myself, against
  ORLANDO. He is drown'd in the brook; look but in, and you shall see
  ORLANDO. Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.
    and under that habit play the knave with him.- Do you hear,
  ORLANDO. You should ask me what time o' day; there's no clock in
    the forest.
  ROSALIND. Then there is no true lover in the forest, else sighing
    every minute and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot
  ORLANDO. And why not the swift foot of Time? Had not that been as
  ORLANDO. I prithee, who doth he trot withal?
  ROSALIND. Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the
    contract of her marriage and the day it is solemniz'd; if the
    the length of seven year.
    not the gout; for the one sleeps easily because he cannot study,
    and the other lives merrily because he feels no pain; the one
    lacking the burden of lean and wasteful learning, the other
  ROSALIND. With a thief to the gallows; for though he go as softly
    as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.
  ROSALIND. With lawyers in the vacation; for they sleep between term
    and term, and then they perceive not how Time moves.
  ROSALIND. With this shepherdess, my sister; here in the skirts of
    the forest, like fringe upon a petticoat.
  ROSALIND. As the coney that you see dwell where she is kindled.
    man; one that knew courtship too well, for there he fell in love.
    hath generally tax'd their whole sex withal.
  ORLANDO. Can you remember any of the principal evils that he laid
    to the charge of women?
  ROSALIND. There were none principal; they were all like one another
  ORLANDO. I prithee recount some of them.
    sick. There is a man haunts the forest that abuses our young
    plants with carving 'Rosalind' on their barks; hangs odes upon
    hawthorns and elegies on brambles; all, forsooth, deifying the
    him some good counsel, for he seems to have the quotidian of love
    for simply your having in beard is a younger brother's revenue.
    are rather point-device in your accoutrements, as loving yourself
    than seeming the lover of any other.
  ORLANDO. Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.
    she does. That is one of the points in the which women still give
    the lie to their consciences. But, in good sooth, are you he that
    hangs the verses on the trees wherein Rosalind is so admired?
  ORLANDO. I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of Rosalind, I
  ORLANDO. Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.
    well a dark house and a whip as madmen do; and the reason why
    they are not so punish'd and cured is that the lunacy is so
    ordinary that the whippers are in love too. Yet I profess curing
    women are for the most part cattle of this colour; would now like
    him, now loathe him; then entertain him, then forswear him; now
    weep for him, then spit at him; that I drave my suitor from his
    forswear the full stream of the world and to live in a nook
    that there shall not be one spot of love in 't.
  ORLANDO. Now, by the faith of my love, I will. Tell me where it is.
  ROSALIND. Go with me to it, and I'll show it you; and, by the way,
    you shall tell me where in the forest you live. Will you go?
    Audrey. And how, Audrey, am I the man yet? Doth my simple feature
  TOUCHSTONE. I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most
    capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.
    good wit seconded with the forward child understanding, it
    Truly, I would the gods had made thee poetical.
  TOUCHSTONE. No, truly; for the truest poetry is the most feigning,
    and lovers are given to poetry; and what they swear in poetry may
    be said as lovers they do feign.
  AUDREY. Do you wish, then, that the gods had made me poetical?
  AUDREY. Well, I am not fair; and therefore I pray the gods make me
  AUDREY. I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.
  TOUCHSTONE. Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness;
    marry thee; and to that end I have been with Sir Oliver Martext,
    the vicar of the next village, who hath promis'd to meet me in
    this place of the forest, and to couple us.
  AUDREY. Well, the gods give us joy!
    in this attempt; for here we have no temple but the wood, no
    odious, they are necessary. It is said: 'Many a man knows no end
    of them. Well, that is the dowry of his wife; 'tis none of his
    own getting. Horns? Even so. Poor men alone? No, no; the noblest
    deer hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the single man therefore
    is the forehead of a married man more honourable than the bare
  MARTEXT. Is there none here to give the woman?
  MARTEXT. Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.
  TOUCHSTONE. As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb, and
    the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires; and as pigeons
    join you together as they join wainscot; then one of you will
  TOUCHSTONE. [Aside] I am not in the mind but I were better to be
    married of him than of another; for he is not like to marry me
  JAQUES. Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.
           Leave me not behind thee.
           I will not to wedding with thee.
  MARTEXT. 'Tis no matter; ne'er a fantastical knave of them all
  CELIA. Do, I prithee; but yet have the grace to consider that tears
  CELIA. As good cause as one would desire; therefore weep.
  ROSALIND. His very hair is of the dissembling colour.
  CELIA. An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.
  ROSALIND. And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of
    winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously; the very ice of
    chastity is in them.
  CELIA. Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.
  CELIA. 'Was' is not 'is'; besides, the oath of a lover is no
    stronger than the word of a tapster; they are both the confirmer
    of false reckonings. He attends here in the forest on the Duke,
    your father.
  ROSALIND. I met the Duke yesterday, and had much question with him.
    he; so he laugh'd and let me go. But what talk we of fathers when
    there is such a man as Orlando?
    words, swears brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite
    traverse, athwart the heart of his lover; as a puny tilter, that
    After the shepherd that complain'd of love,
    Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
    Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
    Between the pale complexion of true love
    And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
    I'll prove a busy actor in their play.                Exeunt
Another part of the forest
    Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
    I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
    Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye.
    That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things,
    Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
    Now I do frown on thee with all my heart;
    And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee.
    Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee.
    Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
    Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not;
    Nor, I am sure, there is not force in eyes
    You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
    Then shall you know the wounds invisible
    As till that time I shall not pity thee.
      mother,
    Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty-
    Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
    I see no more in you than in the ordinary
    That makes the world full of ill-favour'd children.
    Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer;
    So take her to thee, shepherd. Fare you well.
  PHEBE. Sweet youth, I pray you chide a year together;
    I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.
    in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast as she answers thee
    'Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.
    And be not proud; though all the world could see,
  PHEBE. Why, I arn sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.
    Silvius, the time was that I hated thee;
    And yet it is not that I bear thee love;
    I will endure; and I'll employ thee too.
    But do not look for further recompense
    To glean the broken ears after the man
    That the main harvest reaps; loose now and then
  PHEBE. Know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile?
    And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
    That the old carlot once was master of.
    When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
    Than that mix'd in his cheek; 'twas just the difference
    Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask.
    There be some women, Silvius, had they mark'd him
  JAQUES. I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted with
    thee.
  ROSALIND. Those that are in extremity of either are abominable
    fellows, and betray themselves to every modern censure worse than
  ROSALIND. Why then, 'tis good to be a post.
  JAQUES. I have neither the scholar's melancholy, which is
    emulation; nor the musician's, which is fantastical; nor the
    courtier's, which is proud; nor the soldier's, which is
    ambitious; nor the lawyer's, which is politic; nor the lady's,
    which is nice; nor the lover's, which is all these; but it is a
    from many objects, and, indeed, the sundry contemplation of my
    sad. I fear you have sold your own lands to see other men's; then
  ROSALIND. And your experience makes you sad. I had rather have a
  JAQUES. Nay, then, God buy you, an you talk in blank verse.
    strange suits, disable all the benefits of your own country, be
    another trick, never come in my sight more.
    minute into a thousand parts, and break but a part of the
    thousand part of a minute in the affairs of love, it may be said
    the slander of his wife.
    Very good orators, when they are out, they will spit; and for
    lovers lacking- God warn us!- matter, the cleanliest shift is to
  ORLANDO. How if the kiss be denied?
  ROSALIND. Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new
    thousand years old, and in all this time there was not any man
    could to die before, and he is one of the patterns of love.
    good youth, he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont, and,
    being taken with the cramp, was drown'd; and the foolish
    chroniclers of that age found it was- Hero of Sestos. But these
    eaten them, but not for love.
  ROSALIND. Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing? Come,
    sister, you shall be the priest, and marry us. Give me your hand,
  ORLANDO. Pray thee, marry us.
  CELIA. I cannot say the words.
  ROSALIND. Then you must say 'I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.'
  ORLANDO. I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.
  ROSALIND. I might ask you for your commission; but- I do take thee,
    Orlando, for my husband. There's a girl goes before the priest;
  ORLANDO. So do all thoughts; they are wing'd.
  ROSALIND. Say 'a day' without the 'ever.' No, no, Orlando; men are
    April when they woo, December when they wed: maids are May when
    they are maids, but the sky changes when they are wives. I will
    be more jealous of thee than a Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen,
    nothing, like Diana in the fountain, and I will do that when you
  ROSALIND. Or else she could not have the wit to do this. The wiser,
    the waywarder. Make the doors upon a woman's wit, and it will out
    at the casement; shut that, and 'twill out at the key-hole; stop
    that, 'twill fly with the smoke out at the chimney.
    whither wilt?' ROSALIND. Nay, you might keep that check for it, till you met your
  ROSALIND. Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall never
  ORLANDO. For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.
  ROSALIND. Alas, dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours!
  ORLANDO. I must attend the Duke at dinner; by two o'clock I will be
    with thee again.
    think you the most pathetical break-promise, and the most hollow
    lover, and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalind, that may
    be chosen out of the gross band of the unfaithful. Therefore
  ROSALIND. Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such
    have your doublet and hose pluck'd over your head, and show the
    world what the bird hath done to her own nest.
    my affection hath an unknown bottom, like the Bay of Portugal.
  CELIA. Or rather, bottomless; that as fast as you pour affection
    out- let him be judge how deep I am in love. I'll tell thee,
    Aliena, I cannot be out of the sight of Orlando. I'll go find a
        Enter JAQUES and LORDS, in the habit of foresters
  JAQUES. Which is he that killed the deer?
  JAQUES. Let's present him to the Duke, like a Roman conqueror; and
    it would do well to set the deer's horns upon his head for a
      What shall he have that kill'd the deer?
      His leather skin and horns to wear.
      Take thou no scorn to wear the horn;
           Thy father's father wore it;
           And thy father bore it.
      The horn, the horn, the lusty horn,
    I know not the contents; but, as I guess
    By the stern brow and waspish action
    And play the swaggerer. Bear this, bear all.
    Her love is not the hare that I do hunt;
  SILVIUS. No, I protest, I know not the contents;
    And turn'd into the extremity of love.
    I saw her hand; she has a leathern hand,
    Such Ethiope words, blacker in their effect
    Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?
  ROSALIND. She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.
            'Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
            'If the scorn of your bright eyne
            Would they work in mild aspect!
            How then might your prayers move!
            He that brings this love to the
            Whether that thy youth and kind
            Will the faithful offer take
            And then I'll study how to die.'
    such a woman? What, to make thee an instrument, and play false
    strains upon thee! Not to be endur'd! Well, go your way to her,
    for I see love hath made thee tame snake, and say this to her-
    that if she love me, I charge her to love thee; if she will not,
    Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
  CELIA. West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom.
    The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
    Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
    But at this hour the house doth keep itself;
    Like a ripe sister; the woman low,
    And browner than her brother.' Are not you
    The owner of the house I did inquire for?
  OLIVER. When last the young Orlando parted from you,
    Within an hour; and, pacing through the forest,
    Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
    When that the sleeping man should stir; for 'tis
    This seen, Orlando did approach the man,
    And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
  CELIA. O, I have heard him speak of that same brother;
    And he did render him the most unnatural
  ROSALIND. But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
    Food to the suck'd and hungry lioness?
    Made him give battle to the lioness,
  CELIA. Are you his brother?
    So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.
  ROSALIND. But for the bloody napkin?
    When from the first to last, betwixt us two,
    In brief, he led me to the gentle Duke,
    Committing me unto my brother's love;
    He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
    Dy'd in his blood, unto the shepherd youth
  OLIVER. Many will swoon when they do look on blood.
  CELIA. We'll lead you thither.
    I pray you, will you take him by the arm?
    this was well counterfeited. I pray you tell your brother how
  OLIVER. This was not counterfeit; there is too great testimony in
  OLIVER. Well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.
    How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.
  AUDREY. Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old
    But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to
  AUDREY. Ay, I know who 'tis; he hath no interest in me in the
    world; here comes the man you mean.
    head; nay, prithee be cover'd. How old are you, friend?
    fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be
    a fool.' The heathen philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a
    thereby that grapes were made to eat and lips to open. You do
    glass, by filling the one doth empty the other; for all your
    clown, abandon- which is in the vulgar leave- the society- which
    in the boorish is company- of this female- which in the common is
    woman- which together is: abandon the society of this female; or,
    or, to wit, I kill thee, make thee away, translate thy life into
    death, thy liberty into bondage. I will deal in poison with thee,
    or in bastinado, or in steel; I will bandy with thee in faction;
    will o'er-run thee with policy; I will kill thee a hundred and
    fifty ways; therefore tremble and depart.
  OLIVER. Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the poverty
    of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden wooing, nor her sudden
    loves me; consent with both that we may enjoy each other. It
    shall be to your good; for my father's house and all the revenue
    Thither will I invite the Duke and all's contented followers. Go
  ROSALIND. God save you, brother.
  ROSALIND. O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear
  ROSALIND. I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a
  ORLANDO. Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.
  ROSALIND. Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to swoon
    any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams and Caesar's
    thrasonical brag of 'I came, saw, and overcame.' For your brother
    and my sister no sooner met but they look'd; no sooner look'd but
    they lov'd; no sooner lov'd but they sigh'd; no sooner sigh'd but
    they ask'd one another the reason; no sooner knew the reason but
    they sought the remedy- and in these degrees have they made pair
    of stairs to marriage, which they will climb incontinent, or else
    be incontinent before marriage. They are in the very wrath of
    love, and they will together. Clubs cannot part them.
  ORLANDO. They shall be married to-morrow; and I will bid the Duke
    to the nuptial. But, O, how bitter a thing it is to look into
    happiness through another man's eyes! By so much the more shall I
    to-morrow be at the height of heart-heaviness, by how much I
    shall think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.
  ROSALIND. Why, then, to-morrow I cannot serve your turn for
  ROSALIND. I will weary you, then, no longer with idle talking. Know
    of me then- for now I speak to some purpose- that I know you are
    are; neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in some
    not to grace me. Believe then, if you please, that I can do
    If you do love Rosalind so near the heart as your gesture cries
    it out, when your brother marries Aliena shall you marry her. I
    To show the letter that I writ to you.
    You are there follow'd by a faithful shepherd;
  ROSALIND. Pray you, no more of this; 'tis like the howling of Irish
    wolves against the moon. [To SILVIUS] I will help you if I can.
    together. [ To PHEBE ] I will marry you if ever I marry woman,
  TOUCHSTONE. To-morrow is the joyful day, Audre'y; to-morrow will we
    dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the world. Here come
    two of the banish'd Duke's pages.
    spitting, or saying we are hoarse, which are the only prologues
        That o'er the green corn-field did pass
          In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,
        Sweet lovers love the spring.
        Between the acres of the rye,
          In the spring time, &c.
        This carol they began that hour,
          In the spring time, &c.
        And therefore take the present time,
        For love is crowned with the prime,
          In the spring time, &c.
  TOUCHSTONE. Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great
    matter in the ditty, yet the note was very untuneable.
  DUKE SENIOR. Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
    As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
  PHEBE. That will I, should I die the hour after.
  PHEBE. So is the bargain.
    To make these doubts all even.
  ORLANDO. My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
    Methought he was a brother to your daughter.
    And hath been tutor'd in the rudiments
    Obscured in the circle of this forest.
  JAQUES. There is, sure, another flood toward, and these couples are
    coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of very strange beasts which
  JAQUES. Good my lord, bid him welcome. This is the motley-minded
    gentleman that I have so often met in the forest. He hath been a
  TOUCHSTONE. Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the
  TOUCHSTONE. God 'ild you, sir; I desire you of the like. I press in
    here, sir, amongst the rest of the country copulatives, to swear
  TOUCHSTONE. According to the fool's bolt, sir, and such dulcet
  JAQUES. But, for the seventh cause: how did you find the quarrel on
    the seventh cause?
    seeming, Audrey- as thus, sir. I did dislike the cut of a certain
    cut well, he was in the mind it was. This is call'd the Retort
    send me word he cut it to please himself. This is call'd the Quip
    This is call'd the Reply Churlish. If again it was not well cut,
    he would answer I spake not true. This is call'd the Reproof
    is call'd the Countercheck Quarrelsome. And so to the Lie
    Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.
  TOUCHSTONE. I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial, nor
    he durst not give me the Lie Direct; and so we measur'd swords
  JAQUES. Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?
  TOUCHSTONE. O, sir, we quarrel in print by the book, as you have
    books for good manners. I will name you the degrees. The first,
    the Retort Courteous; the second, the Quip Modest; the third, the
    Reply Churlish; the fourth, the Reproof Valiant; the fifth, the
    Countercheck Quarrelsome; the sixth, the Lie with Circumstance;
    the seventh, the Lie Direct. All these you may avoid but the Lie
    justices could not take up a quarrel; but when the parties were
    met themselves, one of them thought but of an If, as: 'If you
    said so, then I said so.' And they shook hands, and swore
    brothers. Your If is the only peace-maker; much virtue in If.
  DUKE SENIOR. He uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under the
    HYMEN.    Then is there mirth in heaven,
                Atone together.
                Yea, brought her hither,
  DUKE SENIOR. If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
  ORLANDO. If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
    Why then, my love adieu!
  ROSALIND. I'll have no father, if you be not he;
              Of these most strange events.
            You and you are sure together,
            As the winter to foul weather.
            How thus we met, and these things finish.
              High wedlock then be honoured.
    Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.
    I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
    That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
    His brother here, and put him to the sword;
    And to the skirts of this wild wood he came,
    Both from his enterprise and from the world;
    His crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother,
    And all their lands restor'd to them again
    Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding:
    To one, his lands withheld; and to the other,
    Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
    According to the measure of their states.
    And thrown into neglect the pompous court.
  JAQUES. To him will I. Out of these convertites
    I am for other than for dancing measures.
  DUKE SENIOR. Proceed, proceed. We will begin these rites,
    As we do trust they'll end, in true delights.    [A dance] Exeunt
  ROSALIND. It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue; but
    it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue. If it
    needs no epilogue. Yet to good wine they do use good bushes; and
    good plays prove the better by the help of good epilogues. What a
    case am I in then, that am neither a good epilogue, nor cannot
    insinuate with you in the behalf of a good play! I am not
    furnish'd like a beggar; therefore to beg will not become me. My
    way is to conjure you; and I'll begin with the women. I charge
    you, O women, for the love you bear to men, to like as much of
    this play as please you; and I charge you, O men, for the love
    hates them- that between you and the women the play may please.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS twin brothers and sons to
DROMIO OF EPHESUS twin brothers, and attendants on
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE the two Antipholuses
A hall in the DUKE'S palace
Enter the DUKE OF EPHESUS, AEGEON, the Merchant
of Syracuse, GAOLER, OFFICERS, and other ATTENDANTS
  And by the doom of death end woes and all.
  Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke
  Who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives,
  Have seal'd his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
  For, since the mortal and intestine jars
  Both by the Syracusians and ourselves,
  Come to the bay of Ephesus-he dies,
  His goods confiscate to the Duke's dispose,
  To quit the penalty and to ransom him.
  Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
  My woes end likewise with the evening sun.
DUKE. Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause
  Yet, that the world may witness that my end
  And the great care of goods at random left,
  A joyful mother of two goodly sons;
  And, which was strange, the one so like the other
  That very hour, and in the self-same inn,
  Those, for their parents were exceeding poor,
  Before the always-wind-obeying deep
  For what obscured light the heavens did grant
  Yet the incessant weepings of my wife,
  And piteous plainings of the pretty babes,
  Forc'd me to seek delays for them and me.
  And this it was, for other means was none:
  And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us;
  My wife, more careful for the latter-born,
  To him one of the other twins was bound,
  Whilst I had been like heedful of the other.
  Fast'ned ourselves at either end the mast,
  And, floating straight, obedient to the stream,
  At length the sun, gazing upon the earth,
  And, by the benefit of his wished light,
  But ere they came-O, let me say no more!
  Gather the sequel by that went before.
  For we may pity, though not pardon thee.
AEGEON. O, had the gods done so, I had not now
  Worthily term'd them merciless to us!
  For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,
  Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst;
  Was carried with more speed before the wind;
  And in our sight they three were taken up
  At length another ship had seiz'd on us;
  And, knowing whom it was their hap to save,
  Gave healthful welcome to their ship-wreck'd guests,
  And would have reft the fishers of their prey,
  Had not their bark been very slow of sail;
  And therefore homeward did they bend their course.
DUKE. And, for the sake of them thou sorrowest for,
  Do me the favour to dilate at full
  What have befall'n of them and thee till now.
  After his brother, and importun'd me
  Reft of his brother, but retain'd his name-
  Might bear him company in the quest of him;
  I hazarded the loss of whom I lov'd.
  Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece,
  Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,
  But here must end the story of my life;
  Could all my travels warrant me they live.
DUKE. Hapless, Aegeon, whom the fates have mark'd
  To bear the extremity of dire mishap!
  Which princes, would they, may not disannul,
  My soul should sue as advocate for thee.
  But though thou art adjudged to the death,
  Yet will I favour thee in what I can.
  Therefore, merchant, I'll limit thee this day
  Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus;
  Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
  And live; if no, then thou art doom'd to die.
  According to the statute of the town,
  Dies ere the weary sun set in the west.
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host.
  And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee.
  Till that, I'll view the manners of the town,
  Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
  And then return and sleep within mine inn;
  Get thee away.
  What, will you walk with me about the town,
  And then go to my inn and dine with me?
  Please you, I'll meet with you upon the mart,
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Farewell till then. I will go lose myself,
  And wander up and down to view the city.
  Commends me to the thing I cannot get.
  I to the world am like a drop of water
  That in the ocean seeks another drop,
  Who, falling there to find his fellow forth,
  So I, to find a mother and a brother,
  In quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.
  Here comes the almanac of my true date.
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Return'd so soon! rather approach'd too late.
  The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit;
  The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell-
  She is so hot because the meat is cold,
  Where have you left the money that I gave you?
  To pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper?
  Tell me, and dally not, where is the money?
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Come, Dromio, come, these jests are out of season;
  Reserve them till a merrier hour than this.
  Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. My charge was but to fetch you from the mart
  Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner.
  Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?
  Perchance you will not bear them patiently.
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Your worship's wife, my mistress at the Phoenix;
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Upon my life, by some device or other
  As, nimble jugglers that deceive the eye,
  Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind,
  Soul-killing witches that deform the body,
  If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner.
  I'll to the Centaur to go seek this slave.
ADRIANA. Neither my husband nor the slave return'd
  And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner;
  Time is their master, and when they see time,
ADRIANA. Why should their liberty than ours be more?
LUCIANA. Because their business still lies out o' door.
LUCIANA. O, know he is the bridle of your will.
  The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls,
  Are their males' subjects, and at their controls.
  Man, more divine, the master of all these,
  Lord of the wide world and wild wat'ry seas,
  Are masters to their females, and their lords;
  Then let your will attend on their accords.
LUCIANA. Not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed.
ADRIANA. How if your husband start some other where?
  They can be meek that have no other cause.
  So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee,
  This fool-begg'd patience in thee will be left.
  scarce understand them.
ADRIANA. But say, I prithee, is he coming home?
  'Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain?'
  For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.
  For God's sake, send some other messenger.
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. And he will bless that cross with other beating;
  You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither;
  If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.
  Do their gay vestments his affections bait?
  By him not ruin'd? Then is he the ground
  But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale,
  I know his eye doth homage otherwhere;
  I see the jewel best enamelled
  Will lose his beauty; yet the gold bides still
  That others touch and, often touching, will
  Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave
  I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.
  My house was at the Phoenix! Wast thou mad,
  Home to the Centaur, with the gold you gave me.
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Villain, thou didst deny the gold's receipt,
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth?
  When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport,
  leave battering, I had rather have it a head. An you use
  these blows long, I must get a sconce for my head, and
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Ay, sir, and wherefore; for they say
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Why, first for flouting me; and then wherefore,
  For urging it the second time to me.
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,
  When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme nor reason?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. No, sir; I think the meat wants that I have.
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Well, sir, then 'twill be dry.
  another dry basting.
  there's a time for all things.
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the
  plain bald pate of Father Time himself.
  recover the lost hair of another man.
  given them in wit.
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Why, but there's many a man
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Not a man of those but he hath the
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. The plainer dealer, the sooner lost;
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Sure ones, then.
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Certain ones, then.
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Name them.
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. The one, to save the money that he spends in
  tiring; the other, that at dinner they should not drop in his
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. You would all this time have prov'd there
  there is no time to recover.
  and therefore to the world's end will have bald followers.
  Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects;
  Unless I spake, or look'd, or touch'd, or carv'd to thee.
  That thou art then estranged from thyself?
  A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
  And take unmingled thence that drop again
  How dearly would it touch thee to the quick,
  And that this body, consecrate to thee,
  And hurl the name of husband in my face,
  And tear the stain'd skin off my harlot-brow,
  And from my false hand cut the wedding-ring,
  I know thou canst, and therefore see thou do it.
  My blood is mingled with the crime of lust;
  I do digest the poison of thy flesh,
  Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed;
LUCIANA. Fie, brother, how the world is chang'd with you!
ADRIANA. By thee; and this thou didst return from him-
  That he did buffet thee, and in his blows
  What is the course and drift of your compact?
  Didst thou deliver to me on the mart.
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. How can she thus, then, call us by our names,
  If aught possess thee from me, it is dross,
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. To me she speaks; she moves me for her theme.
  I'll entertain the offer'd fallacy.
LUCIANA. Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.
  This is the fairy land. O spite of spites!
  If we obey them not, this will ensue:
  To put the finger in the eye and weep,
  Come, sir, to dinner. Dromio, keep the gate.
  Come, sister. Dromio, play the porter well.
  Known unto these, and to myself disguis'd!
  I'll say as they say, and persever so,
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Master, shall I be porter at the gate?
Before the house of ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS
  To see the making of her carcanet,
  He met me on the mart, and that I beat him,
  That you beat me at the mart I have your hand to show;
  If the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave were ink,
  By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. O, Signior Balthazar, either at flesh or fish,
  But though my cates be mean, take them in good part;
  But, soft, my door is lock'd; go bid them let us in.
  Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch.
  When one is one too many? Go get thee from the door.
  My master stays in the street.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. Who talks within there? Ho, open the door!
    from the house I owe?
  The one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame.
LUCE.  [Within]  What a coil is there, Dromio? Who are those at the gate?
LUCE.  [Within]  Have at you with another: that's-when? can you tell?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. SO, Come, help: well struck! there was blow for blow.
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Master, knock the door hard.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. You'll cry for this, minion, if beat the door down.
LUCE.  [Within] What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?
ADRIANA.  [Within]  Who is that at the door, that keeps all this noise?
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. Are you there, wife? You might
ADRIANA.  [Within]  Your wife, sir knave! Go get you from the door.
ANGELO. Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome; we would fain have either.
BALTHAZAR. In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. They stand at the door, master; bid them welcome hither.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.
  Your cake here is warm within; you stand here in the cold;
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. Go fetch me something; I'll break ope the gate.
    out upon thee, hind!
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Here's too much 'out upon thee!' pray thee let me in.
    feathers and fish have no fin.
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. A crow without feather? Master, mean you so?
  For a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a feather;
  If a crow help us in, sirrah, we'll pluck a crow together.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. Go get thee gone; fetch me an iron crow.
  And draw within the compass of suspect
  Why at this time the doors are made against you.
  And let us to the Tiger all to dinner;
  To know the reason of this strange restraint.
  Now in the stirring passage of the day,
  And that supposed by the common rout
  And fetch the chain; by this I know 'tis made.
  Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine;
  For there's the house. That chain will I bestow-
  Upon mine hostess there; good sir, make haste.
  I'll knock elsewhere, to see if they'll disdain me.
Before the house of ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS
  Even in the spring of love, thy love-springs rot?
  Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint;
  Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve;
  Then, gentle brother, get you in again;
  When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.
  Transform me, then, and to your pow'r I'll yield.
  But if that I am I, then well I know
  Spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs,
  And as a bed I'll take them, and there he;
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Call thyself sister, sweet, for I am thee;
  Thee will I love, and with thee lead my life;
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. What claim lays she to thee?
  I have but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Marry, sir, she's the kitchen-wench,
  I warrant, her rags and the tallow in them will burn
  week longer than the whole world.
  go over shoes in the grime of it.
  the bogs.
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. I found it by the barrenness, hard in
  the palm of the hand.
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. I look'd for the chalky cliffs, but I
  could find no whiteness in them; but I guess it stood in her
  chin, by the salt rheum that ran between France and it.
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Where America, the Indies?
  rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich aspect to the
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands?
  marks I had about me, as, the mark of my shoulder, the
  mole in my neck, the great wart on my left arm, that I,
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Go hie thee presently post to the road;
  An if the wind blow any way from shore,
  If any bark put forth, come to the mart,
  And therefore 'tis high time that I were hence.
  I'll stop mine ears against the mermaid's song.
Enter ANGELO with the chain
ANGELO. I know it well, sir. Lo, here is the chain.
  I thought to have ta'en you at the Porpentine;
  And then receive my money for the chain.
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. I pray you, sir, receive the money now,
  But this I think, there's no man is so vain
  When in the streets he meets such golden gifts.
  I'll to the mart, and there for Dromio stay;
  If any ship put out, then straight away.
SECOND MERCHANT. You know since Pentecost the sum is due,
ANGELO. Even just the sum that I do owe to you
  And in the instant that I met with you
  I shall receive the money for the same.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS, and DROMIO OF EPHESUS, from the COURTEZAN'S
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. While I go to the goldsmith's house, go thou
  But, soft, I see the goldsmith. Get thee gone;
  I promised your presence and the chain;
  But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.
  If it were chain'd together, and therefore came not.
ANGELO. Saving your merry humour, here's the note
  How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
  The fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion,
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. I am not furnish'd with the present money;
  Besides, I have some business in the town.
  Good signior, take the stranger to my house,
  And with you take the chain, and bid my wife
  Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof.
  Perchance I will be there as soon as you.
ANGELO. Then you will bring the chain to her yourself?
ANGELO. Well, sir, I will. Have you the chain about you?
ANGELO. Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain;
  Your breach of promise to the Porpentine;
ANGELO. You hear how he importunes me-the chain!
  Either send the chain or send by me some token.
  Come, where's the chain? I pray you let me see it.
  If not, I'll leave him to the officer.
ANGELO. The money that you owe me for the chain.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. I owe you none till I receive the chain.
OFFICER. I do; and charge you in the Duke's name to obey me.
  Either consent to pay this sum for me,
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. Consent to pay thee that I never had!
  I would not spare my brother in this case,
OFFICER. I do arrest you, sir; you hear the suit.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. I do obey thee till I give thee bail.
  As all the metal in your shop will answer.
Enter DROMIO OF SYRACUSE, from the bay
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Master, there's a bark of Epidamnum
  And then, sir, she bears away. Our fraughtage, sir,
  The oil, the balsamum, and aqua-vitx.
  The ship is in her trim; the merry wind
  Blows fair from land; they stay for nought at an
  But for their owner, master, and yourself.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. THOU drunken slave! I sent the for a rope;
  And told thee to what purpose and what end.
  You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.
  To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight;
  Give her this key, and tell her in the desk
  Tell her I am arrested in the street,
  And that shall bail me; hie thee, slave, be gone.
  Thither I must, although against my will,
  For servants must their masters' minds fulfil.
ADRIANA. Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so?
ADRIANA. He meant he did me none-the more my spite.
  First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.
LUCIANA. Who would be jealous then of such a one?
  And yet would herein others' eyes were worse.
  Far from her nest the lapwing cries away;
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Here go-the desk, the purse. Sweet
  One that, before the Judgment, carries poor souls to hell.
ADRIANA. Why, man, what is the matter?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. I do not know the matter; he is rested on the case.
  Will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk?
ADRIANA. What, the chain?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. No, no, the bell; 'tis time that I were gone.
  It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one.
  If 'a be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,
ADRIANA. Go, Dromio, there's the money; bear it straight,
  As if I were their well-acquainted friend;
  Some other give me thanks for kindnesses,
  And therewithal took measure of my body.
  Sure, these are but imaginary wiles,
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Master, here's the gold you sent me
  for. What, have you got the picture of old Adam new-apparell'd?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Not that Adam that kept the Paradise,
  but that Adam that keeps the prison; he that goes in the
  calf's skin that was kill'd for the Prodigal; he that came behind
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. I understand thee not.
  went, like a bass-viol, in a case of leather; the man, sir,
  that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob, and rest
  them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed men, and give
  them suits of durance; he that sets up his rest to do more
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band;
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Well, sir, there rest in your foolery. Is
  there any ship puts forth to-night? May we be gone?
  hour since that the bark Expedition put forth to-night; and
  then were you hind'red by the sergeant, to tarry for the
  boy Delay. Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you.
  I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now.
  Is that the chain you promis'd me to-day?
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. It is the devil.
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Nay, she is worse, she is the devil's
  dam, and here she comes in the habit of a light wench; and
  thereof comes that the wenches say 'God damn me!' That's
  they appear to men like angels of light; light is an effect
  that must eat with the devil.
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Avoid then, fiend! What tell'st thou me of supping?
  I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.
COURTEZAN. Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner,
  Or, for my diamond, the chain you promis'd,
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Some devils ask but the parings of one's nail,
COURTEZAN. I pray you, sir, my ring, or else the chain;
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. 'Fly pride' says the peacock. Mistress, that you know.
  And for the same he promis'd me a chain;
  Both one and other he denies me now.
  The reason that I gather he is mad,
  On purpose shut the doors against his way.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS with the OFFICER
  I'll give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money,
  To warrant thee, as I am 'rested for.
  And will not lightly trust the messenger.
  Here comes my man; I think he brings the money.
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Here's that, I warrant you, will pay them all.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. But where's the money?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. I'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.
  by my long 'ears. I have served him from the hour of my
Enter ADRIANA, LUCIANA, the COURTEZAN, and a SCHOOLMASTER
  rather, to prophesy like the parrot, 'Beware the rope's-end.'
PINCH. I charge thee, Satan, hous'd within this man,
  And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight.
  I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. You minion, you, are these your customers?
  Did this companion with the saffron face
  Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut,
  Free from these slanders and this open shame!
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. And did not she herself revile me there?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Sans fable, she herself revil'd you there.
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Certes, she did; the kitchen-vestal scorn'd you.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. And did not I in rage depart from thence?
  That since have felt the vigour of his rage.
ADRIANA. Is't good to soothe him in these contraries?
PINCH. It is no shame; the fellow finds his vein,
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. Thou hast suborn'd the goldsmith to arrest me.
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. God and the rope-maker bear me witness
  I know it by their pale and deadly looks.
  And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?
ADRIANA. I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.
  But with these nails I'll pluck out these false eyes
  I am thy prisoner. Wilt thou suffer them
ADRIANA. I will discharge thee ere I go from thee;
  And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. Out on thee, villian! Wherefore
LUCIANA. God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk!
ADRIANA. I know the man. What is the sum he owes?
  Come, gaoler, bring me where the goldsmith is;
  I long to know the truth hereof at large.
LUCIANA. God, for thy mercy! they are loose again.
  Let's call more help to have them bound again.
OFFICER. Away, they'll kill us!
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. I see these witches are afraid of swords.
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Come to the Centaur; fetch our stuff from thence.
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Faith, stay here this night; they will
  surely do us no harm; you saw they speak us fair, give us
  gold; methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for
  the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of me,
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. I will not stay to-night for all the town;
  But I protest he had the chain of me,
SECOND MERCHANT. How is the man esteem'd here in the city?
  Second to none that lives here in the city;
  Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
SECOND MERCHANT. These ears of mine, thou know'st, did hear thee.
  Fie on thee, wretch! 'tis pity that thou liv'st
  Against thee presently, if thou dar'st stand.
SECOND MERCHANT. I dare, and do defy thee for a villain.
Enter ADRIANA, LUCIANA, the COURTEZAN, and OTHERS
  Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house.
<Exeunt ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE and DROMIO OF SYRACUSE to the priory
Enter the LADY ABBESS
ABBESS. Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?
ABBESS. How long hath this possession held the man?
  And much different from the man he was;
  Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing.
  Which of these sorrows is he subject to?
ADRIANA. To none of these, except it be the last;
ADRIANA. It was the copy of our conference.
  Alone, it was the subject of my theme;
ABBESS. And thereof came it that the man was mad.
  And thereof comes it that his head is light.
  Thereof the raging fire of fever bred;
  The consequence is, then, thy jealous fits
  Hath scar'd thy husband from the use of wits.
  Why bear you these rebukes, and answer not?
ABBESS. Neither; he took this place for sanctuary,
  And therefore let me have him home with me.
  Till I have us'd the approved means I have,
  To separate the husband and the wife.
LUCIANA. Complain unto the Duke of this indignity.
  Have won his Grace to come in person hither
  And take perforce my husband from the Abbess.
SECOND MERCHANT. By this, I think, the dial points at five;
  Anon, I'm sure, the Duke himself in person
  Comes this way to the melancholy vale,
  Behind the ditches of the abbey here.
  Against the laws and statutes of this town,
ANGELO. See where they come; we will behold his death.
LUCIANA. Kneel to the Duke before he pass the abbey.
Enter the DUKE, attended; AEGEON, bareheaded;
with the HEADSMAN and other OFFICERS
  If any friend will pay the sum for him,
ADRIANA. Justice, most sacred Duke, against the Abbess!
  It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.
  That desp'rately he hurried through the street,
  Doing displeasure to the citizens
  By rushing in their houses, bearing thence
  Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went,
  That here and there his fury had committed.
  He broke from those that had the guard of him,
  We came again to bind them. Then they fled
  Into this abbey, whither we pursu'd them;
  And here the Abbess shuts the gates on us,
  And I to thee engag'd a prince's word,
  To do him all the grace and good I could.
  Go, some of you, knock at the abbey gate,
  And bid the Lady Abbess come to me,
  Beaten the maids a-row and bound the doctor,
  Whose beard they have sing'd off with brands of fire;
  And ever, as it blaz'd, they threw on him
  Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair.
  My master preaches patience to him, and the while
  Between them they will kill the conjurer.
  Even now we hous'd him in the abbey here,
  And now he's there, past thought of human reason.
  Even for the service that long since I did thee,
  When I bestrid thee in the wars, and took
  Deep scars to save thy life; even for the blood
  That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.
AEGEON. Unless the fear of death doth make me dote,
ANTIPHOLUS OFEPHESUS. Justice, sweet Prince, against that woman there!
  Even in the strength and height of injury.
  Beyond imagination is the wrong
ANTIPHOLUS OFEPHESUS. This day, great Duke, she shut the doors upon me,
  To-day did dine together. So befall my soul
  In this the madman justly chargeth them.
  Neither disturbed with the effect of wine,
  That goldsmith there, were he not pack'd with her,
  Could witness it, for he was with me then;
  Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
  Where Balthazar and I did dine together.
  Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,
  I went to seek him. In the street I met him,
  That I this day of him receiv'd the chain,
  Which, God he knows, I saw not; for the which
  Then fairly I bespoke the officer
  Of vile confederates. Along with them
  Cries out I was possess'd. Then all together
  They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence,
  There left me and my man, both bound together;
  Ran hither to your Grace; whom I beseech
  For these deep shames and great indignities.
DUKE. But had he such a chain of thee, or no?
  These people saw the chain about his neck.
SECOND MERCHANT. Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine
  Heard you confess you had the chain of him,
  After you first forswore it on the mart;
  And thereupon I drew my sword on you,
  And then you fled into this abbey here,
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. I never came within these abbey walls,
  I never saw the chain, so help me Heaven!
  You say he din'd at home: the goldsmith here
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Sir, he din'd with her there, at the Porpentine.
DUKE. Saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here?
DUKE. Why, this is strange. Go call the Abbess hither.
<Exit one to the ABBESS
  And pay the sum that may deliver me.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. Neither.
  And all the conduits of my blood froze up,
  All these old witnesses-I cannot err-
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. I never saw my father in my life.
  the city Can witness with me that it is not so:
DUKE. I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years
  I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.
Re-enter the ABBESS, with ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE and DROMIO OF SYRACUSE
[All gather to see them]
DUKE. One of these men is genius to the other;
  And so of these. Which is the natural man,
  And which the spirit? Who deciphers them?
  Speak, old Aegeon, if thou be'st the man
  That bore thee at a burden two fair sons.
  O, if thou be'st the same Aegeon, speak,
  And speak unto the same Aemilia!
  That floated with thee on the fatal raft?
  And the twin Dromio, all were taken up;
  By force took Dromio and my son from them,
  And me they left with those of Epidamnum.
  What then became of them I cannot tell;
  These two Antipholus', these two so like,
  And these two Dromios, one in semblance-
  These are the parents to these children,
  Which accidentally are met together.
  Did call me brother.  [To LUCIANA]  What I told you then,
ANGELO. That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.
  And Dromio my man did bring them me.
  I see we still did meet each other's man,
  And thereupon these ERRORS are arose.
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS. These ducats pawn I for my father here.
DUKE. It shall not need; thy father hath his life.
ABBESS. Renowned Duke, vouchsafe to take the pains
  To go with us into the abbey here,
  And you the calendars of their nativity,
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.
  Embrace thy brother there; rejoice with him.
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother;
  Will you walk in to see their gossiping?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE. We'll draw cuts for the senior; till then,
DROMIO OF EPHESUS. Nay, then, thus:
  We came into the world like brother and brother,
  And now let's go hand in hand, not one before another.
    Generals against the Volscians
    Tribunes of the People
  TULLUS AUFIDIUS, General of the Volscians
  VOLUMNIA, mother to Coriolanus
    Soldiers, Citizens, Messengers, Servants to Aufidius, and other
Rome and the neighbourhood; Corioli and the neighbourhood; Antium
Enter a company of mutinous citizens, with staves, clubs, and other weapons
  FIRST CITIZEN. Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.
  FIRST CITIZEN. YOU are all resolv'd rather to die than to famish?
  FIRST CITIZEN. First, you know Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the
  FIRST CITIZEN. We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good.
    What authority surfeits on would relieve us; if they would yield
    us but the superfluity while it were wholesome, we might guess
    they relieved us humanely; but they think we are too dear. The
    leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an
    inventory to particularize their abundance; our sufferance is a
    gain to them. Let us revenge this with our pikes ere we become
    rakes; for the gods know I speak this in hunger for bread, not in
  FIRST CITIZEN. Against him first; he's a very dog to the
    was for his country, he did it to please his mother and to be
    partly proud, which he is, even to the altitude of his virtue.
    within]  What shouts are these? The other side o' th' city is
    the people.
  FIRST CITIZEN. He's one honest enough; would all the rest were so!
  FIRST CITIZEN. Our business is not unknown to th' Senate; they have
    they shall know we have strong arms too.
    Have the patricians of you. For your wants,
    Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them
    Against the Roman state; whose course will on
    Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,
    The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
    Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack,
    Thither where more attends you; and you slander
    The helms o' th' state, who care for you like fathers,
    When you curse them as enemies.
    yet. Suffer us to famish, and their storehouses cramm'd with
    any wholesome act established against the rich, and provide more
    piercing statutes daily to chain up and restrain the poor. If the
    wars eat us not up, they will; and there's all the love they bear
  MENENIUS. Either you must
  MENENIUS. There was a time when all the body's members
    Rebell'd against the belly; thus accus'd it:
    Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
    Like labour with the rest; where th' other instruments
    Unto the appetite and affection common
    Of the whole body. The belly answer'd-
  FIRST CITIZEN. Well, sir, what answer made the belly?
    Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus-
    For look you, I may make the belly smile
    To th' discontented members, the mutinous parts
    The kingly crowned head, the vigilant eye,
    The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier,
    Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter,
    With other muniments and petty helps
    Is this our fabric, if that they-
  MENENIUS. What then?
    Fore me, this fellow speaks! What then? What then?
  FIRST CITIZEN. Should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd,
    Who is the sink o' th' body-
  MENENIUS. Well, what then?
  FIRST CITIZEN. The former agents, if they did complain,
    What could the belly answer?
    Patience awhile, you'st hear the belly's answer.
    'That I receive the general food at first
    Because I am the storehouse and the shop
    Of the whole body. But, if you do remember,
    I send it through the rivers of your blood,
    Even to the court, the heart, to th' seat o' th' brain;
    And, through the cranks and offices of man,
    Whereby they live. And though that all at once
    You, my good friends'- this says the belly; mark me.
    From me do back receive the flour of all,
    And leave me but the bran.' What say you to' t?
    And you the mutinous members; for, examine
    Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
    Touching the weal o' th' common, you shall find
    But it proceeds or comes from them to you,
    You, the great toe of this assembly?
  FIRST CITIZEN. I the great toe? Why the great toe?
    Rome and her rats are at the point of battle;
  MARCIUS. Thanks. What's the matter, you dissentious rogues
    That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
  MARCIUS. He that will give good words to thee will flatter
    The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
    Than is the coal of fire upon the ice
    Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is
    Him vile that was your garland. What's the matter
    That in these several places of the city
    You cry against the noble Senate, who,
    Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
    Would feed on one another? What's their seeking?
  MENENIUS. For corn at their own rates, whereof they say
    And feebling such as stand not in their liking
    Below their cobbled shoes. They say there's grain enough!
    Would the nobility lay aside their ruth
    With thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high
  MENENIUS. Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded;
    For though abundantly they lack discretion,
    Yet are they passing cowardly. But, I beseech you,
    What says the other troop?
    They said they were an-hungry; sigh'd forth proverbs-
    That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not
    Corn for the rich men only. With these shreds
    They vented their complainings; which being answer'd,
    And a petition granted them- a strange one,
    To break the heart of generosity
    And make bold power look pale- they threw their caps
    As they would hang them on the horns o' th' moon,
    Shouting their emulation.
  MENENIUS. What is granted them?
  MARCIUS. Five tribunes, to defend their vulgar wisdoms,
    Of their own choice. One's Junius Brutus-
    The rabble should have first unroof'd the city
    Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
  MARCIUS. Here. What's the matter?
  MESSENGER. The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.
  MARCIUS. I am glad on't; then we shall ha' means to vent
         Enter COMINIUS, TITUS LARTIUS, with other SENATORS;
  COMINIUS. You have fought together?
  MARCIUS. Were half to half the world by th' ears, and he
    Attend upon Cominius to these wars.
    I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other
  FIRST SENATOR.  [To the Citizens]  Hence to your homes; be gone.
  MARCIUS. Nay, let them follow.
    The Volsces have much corn: take these rats thither
    To gnaw their garners. Worshipful mutineers,
  SICINIUS. When we were chosen tribunes for the people-
  BRUTUS. Being mov'd, he will not spare to gird the gods.
  SICINIUS. Bemock the modest moon.
    Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
  BRUTUS. Fame, at the which he aims-
    A place below the first; for what miscarries
    Shall be the general's fault, though he perform
    Will then cry out of Marcius 'O, if he
    Had borne the business!'
    Though Marcius earn'd them not; and all his faults
    How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
    That they of Rome are ent'red in our counsels
    Since I heard thence; these are the words- I think
    I have the letter here;.yes, here it is:
    Whether for east or west. The dearth is great;
    Whither 'tis bent. Most likely 'tis for you;
  FIRST SENATOR. Our army's in the field;
    They needs must show themselves; which in the hatching,
    It seem'd, appear'd to Rome. By the discovery
    If they set down before's, for the remove
    Some parcels of their power are forth already,
    And only hitherward. I leave your honours.
Enter VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIA, mother and wife to MARCIUS;
they set them down on two low stools and sew
    rejoice in that absence wherein he won honour than in the
    he was but tender-bodied, and the only son of my womb; when youth
    kings' entreaties, a mother should not sell him an hour from her
    return'd his brows bound with oak. I tell thee, daughter, I
  VIRGILIA. But had he died in the business, madam, how then?
  VOLUMNIA. Then his good report should have been my son; I therein
    good Marcius, I had rather had eleven die nobly for their country
  GENTLEWOMAN. Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.
    Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum;
    As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him.
    With his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes,
  VOLUMNIA. He had rather see the swords and hear a drum than look
  VALERIA. O' my word, the father's son! I'll swear 'tis a very
    hour together; has such a confirm'd countenance! I saw him run
    again, catch'd it again; or whether his fall enrag'd him, or how
  VOLUMNIA. One on's father's moods.
  VALERIA. Come, lay aside your stitchery; I must have you play the
  VIRGILIA. Indeed, no, by your patience; I'll not over the threshold
    till my lord return from the wars.
    must go visit the good lady that lies in.
    prayers; but I cannot go thither.
  VALERIA. You would be another Penelope; yet they say all the yarn
  VIRGILIA. O, good madam, there can be none yet.
  VALERIA. Verily, I do not jest with you; there came news from him
    is: the Volsces have an army forth; against whom Cominius the
    Titus Lartius are set down before their city Corioli; they
  VALERIA. In troth, I think she would. Fare you well, then. Come,
    good sweet lady. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy solemness out o'
  VALERIA. Well then, farewell.                           Exeunt
with CAPTAINS and soldiers. To them a MESSENGER
  MARCIUS. Yonder comes news; a wager- they have met.
  MARCIUS. Say, has our general met the enemy?
  LARTIUS. So, the good horse is mine.
    For half a hundred years. Summon the town.
  MARCIUS. How far off lie these armies?
  MARCIUS. Then shall we hear their 'larum, and they ours.
    Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work,
          They sound a parley. Enter two SENATORS with others,
                      on the walls of Corioli
    Rather than they shall pound us up; our gates,
    They'll open of themselves.  [Alarum far off]  Hark you far off!
  MARCIUS. O, they are at it!
                   Enter the army of the Volsces
  MARCIUS. They fear us not, but issue forth their city.
          Alarum. The Romans are beat back to their trenches.
  MARCIUS. All the contagion of the south light on you,
    Farther than seen, and one infect another
    Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese
    That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
    Or, by the fires of heaven, I'll leave the foe
    If you'll stand fast we'll beat them to their wives,
    As they us to our trenches. Follow me.
         Another alarum. The Volsces fly, and MARCIUS follows
                          them to the gates
    So, now the gates are ope; now prove good seconds;
    'Tis for the followers fortune widens them,
    Not for the fliers. Mark me, and do the like.
                    [MARCIUS enters the gates]
  FIRST SOLDIER. See, they have shut him in.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Following the fliers at the very heels,
    With them he enters; who, upon the sudden,
    Clapp'd to their gates. He is himself alone,
    To answer all the city.
    Thou mad'st thine enemies shake, as if the world
          Re-enter MARCIUS, bleeding, assaulted by the enemy
                            [They fight, and all enter the city]
  MARCIUS. See here these movers that do prize their hours
    Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves,
    Ere yet the fight be done, pack up. Down with them!
    And hark, what noise the general makes! To him!
    There is the man of my soul's hate, Aufidius,
    Piercing our Romans; then, valiant Titus, take
    Convenient numbers to make good the city;
    Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste
    The blood I drop is rather physical
  LARTIUS. Now the fair goddess, Fortune,
    Fall deep in love with thee, and her great charms
    Go sound thy trumpet in the market-place;
    Call thither all the officers o' th' town,
    Where they shall know our mind. Away!                 Exeunt
Near the camp of COMINIUS
  COMINIUS. Breathe you, my friends. Well fought; we are come off
    Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands
    Lead their successes as we wish our own,
    I saw our party to their trenches driven,
    And then I came away.
  COMINIUS. 'Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums.
  MESSENGER. Spies of the Volsces
    He has the stamp of Marcius, and I have
    More than I know the sound of Marcius' tongue
  COMINIUS. Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,
    Ransoming him or pitying, threat'ning th' other;
    Holding Corioli in the name of Rome
    Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
    Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
    Where is he? Call him hither.
    He did inform the truth. But for our gentlemen,
    The common file- a plague! tribunes for them!
    The mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat as they did budge
    From rascals worse than they.
  MARCIUS. Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.
    Where is the enemy? Are you lords o' th' field?
  MARCIUS. How lies their battle? Know you on which side
    They have plac'd their men of trust?
    Their bands i' th' vaward are the Antiates,
    Of their best trust; o'er them Aufidius,
    By all the battles wherein we have fought,
    By th' blood we have shed together, by th' vows
    And that you not delay the present, but,
    Filling the air with swords advanc'd and darts,
  MARCIUS. Those are they
    And follow Marcius.           [They all shout and wave their
       swords, take him up in their arms and cast up their caps]
    If these shows be not outward, which of you
    Able to bear against the great Aufidius
    Though thanks to all, must I select from all; the rest
    Shall bear the business in some other fight,
toward COMINIUS and CAIUS MARCIUS, enters with a LIEUTENANT, other soldiers,
  LARTIUS. So, let the ports be guarded; keep your duties
    As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
    Those centuries to our aid; the rest will serve
    For a short holding. If we lose the field
    We cannot keep the town.
A field of battle between the Roman and the Volscian camps
  MARCIUS. I'll fight with none but thee, for I do hate thee
  MARCIUS. Let the first budger die the other's slave,
    And the gods doom him after!
  MARCIUS. Within these three hours, Tullus,
  AUFIDIUS. Wert thou the Hector
    That was the whip of your bragg'd progeny,
       Here they fight, and certain Volsces come in the aid
        of AUFIDIUS. MARCIUS fights till they be driven in
COMINIUS with the Romans; at another door, MARCIUS, with his arm in a scarf
  COMINIUS. If I should tell thee o'er this thy day's work,
    And, gladly quak'd, hear more; where the dull tribunes,
    That with the fusty plebeians hate thine honours,
    Shall say against their hearts 'We thank the gods
         Enter TITUS LARTIUS, with his power, from the pursuit
    Here is the steed, we the caparison.
  MARCIUS. Pray now, no more; my mother,
    Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
    Which, to the spire and top of praises vouch'd,
  MARCIUS. I have some wounds upon me, and they smart
    To hear themselves rememb'red.
  COMINIUS. Should they not,
    Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude
    And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses-
    We render you the tenth; to be ta'en forth
    Before the common distribution at
    That have beheld the doing.
   cast up their caps and lances. COMINIUS and LARTIUS stand bare
    May these same instruments which you profane
    Soft as the parasite's silk, let him be made
    As to us, to all the world, that Caius Marcius
    Wears this war's garland; in token of the which,
    My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
    With all th' applause-and clamour of the host,
    Whether I blush or no. Howbeit, I thank you;
    For their own good and ours.
    But then Aufidius was within my view,
    Were he the butcher of my son, he should
    Be free as is the wind. Deliver him, Titus.
The camp of the Volsces
    I have fought with thee; so often hast thou beat me;
  FIRST SOLDIER. He's the devil.
    At home, upon my brother's guard, even there,
    Against the hospitable canon, would I
    Learn how 'tis held, and what they are that must
  AUFIDIUS. I am attended at the cypress grove; I pray you-
    'Tis south the city mills- bring me word thither
    How the world goes, that to the pace of it
Enter MENENIUS, with the two Tribunes of the people, SICINIUS and BRUTUS
  MENENIUS. Not according to the prayer of the people, for they love
  SICINIUS. Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.
  MENENIUS. Pray you, who does the wolf love?
  MENENIUS. Ay, to devour him, as the hungry plebeians would the
  BRUTUS. And topping all others in boasting.
    here in the city- I mean of us o' th' right-hand file? Do you?
    dispositions the reins, and be angry at your pleasures- at the
    pride. O that you could turn your eyes toward the napes of your
  BOTH TRIBUNES. What then, sir?
  MENENIUS. Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting,
    be something imperfect in favouring the first complaint, hasty
    with the buttock of the night than with the forehead of the
    Lycurguses- if the drink you give me touch my palate adversely, I
    deliver'd the matter well, when I find the ass in compound with
    the major part of your syllables; and though I must be content to
    bear with those that say you are reverend grave men, yet they lie
    deadly that tell you you have good faces. If you see this in the
  MENENIUS. You know neither me, yourselves, nor any thing. You are
    a fosset-seller, and then rejourn the controversy of threepence
    between party and party, if you chance to be pinch'd with the
    colic, you make faces like mummers, set up the bloody flag
    the controversy bleeding, the more entangled by your hearing. All
    the peace you make in their cause is calling both the parties
    for the table than a necessary bencher in the Capitol.
  MENENIUS. Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall
    best unto the purpose, it is not worth the wagging of your
    though peradventure some of the best of 'em were hereditary
    would infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly
    How now, my as fair as noble ladies- and the moon, were she
    earthly, no nobler- whither do you follow your eyes so fast?
  VOLUMNIA. Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches; for the
  MENENIUS. Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. Hoo!
  VOLUMNIA. Look, here's a letter from him; the state hath another,
    his wife another; and I think there's one at home for you.
  VIRGILIA. Yes, certain, there's a letter for you; I saw't.
    health; in which time I will make a lip at the physician. The
  VOLUMNIA. O, he is wounded, I thank the gods for't.
  VOLUMNIA. On's brows, Menenius, he comes the third time home with
    the oaken garland.
  VOLUMNIA. Titus Lartius writes they fought together, but Aufidius
    had stay'd by him, I would not have been so fidius'd for all the
    chests in Corioli and the gold that's in them. Is the Senate
  VOLUMNIA. Good ladies, let's go. Yes, yes, yes: the Senate has
    letters from the general, wherein he gives my son the whole name
    of the war; he hath in this action outdone his former deeds
  VALERIA. In troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him.
  VIRGILIA. The gods grant them true!
  MENENIUS. True! I'll be sworn they are true. Where is he wounded?
    [To the TRIBUNES]  God save your good worships! Marcius is coming
  VOLUMNIA. I' th' shoulder and i' th' left arm; there will be large
    cicatrices to show the people when he shall stand for his place.
    He received in the repulse of Tarquin seven hurts i' th' body.
  MENENIUS. One i' th' neck and two i' th' thigh- there's nine that I
    [A shout and flourish]  Hark! the trumpets.
  VOLUMNIA. These are the ushers of Marcius. Before him he carries
    Which, being advanc'd, declines, and then men die.
            A sennet. Trumpets sound. Enter COMINIUS the
              GENERAL, and TITUS LARTIUS; between them,
    With fame, a name to Caius Marcius; these
  COMINIUS. Look, sir, your mother!
    You have, I know, petition'd all the gods
    What is it? Coriolanus must I can thee?
    Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear,
    And mothers that lack sons.
  MENENIUS. Now the gods crown thee!
    That is not glad to see thee! You are three
    That Rome should dote on; yet, by the faith of men,
  HERALD. Give way there, and go on.
  CORIOLANUS.  [To his wife and mother]  Your hand, and yours.
    But with them change of honours.
    And the buildings of my fancy; only
    Our Rome will cast upon thee.
  CORIOLANUS. Know, good mother,
    I had rather be their servant in my way
    Than sway with them in theirs.
  COMINIUS. On, to the Capitol.
  BRUTUS. All tongues speak of him and the bleared sights
    While she chats him; the kitchen malkin pins
    Clamb'ring the walls to eye him; stalls, bulks, windows,
    Are smother'd up, leads fill'd and ridges hors'd
    Do press among the popular throngs and puff
    Commit the war of white and damask in
    Of Phoebus' burning kisses. Such a pother,
  SICINIUS. On the sudden
  BRUTUS. In that there's comfort.
    The commoners, for whom we stand, but they
    Upon their ancient malice will forget
    With the least cause these his new honours; which
    That he will give them make I as little question
    Nor, showing, as the manner is, his wounds
    To th' people, beg their stinking breaths.
  BRUTUS. It was his word. O, he would miss it rather
    Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him
    And the desire of the nobles.
  SICINIUS. It shall be to him then as our good wills:
    We must suggest the people in what hatred
    He still hath held them; that to's power he would
    Have made them mules, silenc'd their pleaders, and
    Dispropertied their freedoms; holding them
    Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
    Than camels in their war, who have their provand
    For sinking under them.
    Shall touch the people- which time shall not want,
    To kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze
  BRUTUS. What's the matter?
  MESSENGER. You are sent for to the Capitol. 'Tis thought
    I have seen the dumb men throng to see him and
    Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers,
    Upon him as he pass'd; the nobles bended
    As to Jove's statue, and the commons made
    A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts.
    I never saw the like.
  BRUTUS. Let's to the Capitol,
    But hearts for the event.
Enter two OFFICERS, to lay cushions, as it were in the Capitol
  FIRST OFFICER. Come, come, they are almost here. How many stand for
  SECOND OFFICER. Three, they say; but 'tis thought of every one
    loves not the common people.
  SECOND OFFICER. Faith, there have been many great men that have
    flatter'd the people, who ne'er loved them; and there be many
    that they have loved, they know not wherefore; so that, if they
    love they know not why, they hate upon no better a ground.
    Therefore, for Coriolanus neither to care whether they love or
    hate him manifests the true knowledge he has in their
    disposition, and out of his noble carelessness lets them plainly
  FIRST OFFICER. If he did not care whether he had their love or no,
    he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither good nor harm;
    but he seeks their hate with greater devotion than they can
    him their opposite. Now to seem to affect the malice and
    displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he dislikes- to
    flatter them for their love.
    supple and courteous to the people, bonneted, without any further
    deed to have them at all, into their estimation and report; but
    he hath so planted his honours in their eyes and his actions in
    their hearts that for their tongues to be silent and not confess
    so much were a kind of ingrateful injury; to report otherwise
    were a malice that, giving itself the lie, would pluck reproof
  FIRST OFFICER. No more of him; he's a worthy man. Make way, they
         A sennet. Enter the PATRICIANS and the TRIBUNES
         OF THE PEOPLE, LICTORS before them; CORIOLANUS,
            MENENIUS, COMINIUS the Consul. SICINIUS and
               BRUTUS take their places by themselves.
  MENENIUS. Having determin'd of the Volsces, and
    As the main point of this our after-meeting,
    Rather our state's defective for requital
    Your loving motion toward the common body,
    The theme of our assembly.
  BRUTUS. Which the rather
    A kinder value of the people than
    He hath hereto priz'd them at.
    I would you rather had been silent. Please you
    Than the rebuke you give it.
    But tie him not to be their bedfellow.
    I had rather have my wounds to heal again
    Than hear say how I got them.
    You sooth'd not, therefore hurt not. But your people,
    I love them as they weigh-
  CORIOLANUS. I had rather have one scratch my head i' th' sun
    When the alarum were struck than idly sit
  MENENIUS. Masters of the people,
    He had rather venture all his limbs for honour
  COMINIUS. I shall lack voice; the deeds of Coriolanus
    That valour is the chiefest virtue and
    Most dignifies the haver. If it be,
    The man I speak of cannot in the world
    Beyond the mark of others; our then Dictator,
    When he might act the woman in the scene,
    Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age
    And in the brunt of seventeen battles since
    He lurch'd all swords of the garland. For this last,
    I cannot speak him home. He stopp'd the fliers,
    And by his rare example made the coward
    When by and by the din of war 'gan pierce
    His ready sense, then straight his doubled spirit
    And to the battle came he; where he did
    Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if
  FIRST SENATOR. He cannot but with measure fit the honours
    And look'd upon things precious as they were
    The common muck of the world. He covets less
    His deeds with doing them, and is content
    To spend the time to end it.
    To make thee consul.
  CORIOLANUS. I do owe them still
  MENENIUS. It then remains
    That you do speak to the people.
    Put on the gown, stand naked, and entreat them
    For my wounds' sake to give their suffrage. Please you
  SICINIUS. Sir, the people
    Must have their voices; neither will they bate
  MENENIUS. Put them not to't.
    Pray you go fit you to the custom, and
    Be taken from the people.
  CORIOLANUS. To brag unto them 'Thus I did, and thus!'
    Show them th' unaching scars which I should hide,
    As if I had receiv'd them for the hire
    Of their breath only!
    We recommend to you, Tribunes of the People,
    Our purpose to them; and to our noble consul
  BRUTUS. You see how he intends to use the people.
  SICINIUS. May they perceive's intent! He will require them
    Should be in them to give.
  BRUTUS. Come, we'll inform them
    I know they do attend us.                             Exeunt
    wounds and speak for them; so, if he tell us his noble deeds, we
    must also tell him our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is
    monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful were to make a
    monster of the multitude; of the which we being members should
    will serve; for once we stood up about the corn, he himself stuck
    not to call us the many-headed multitude.
    were to issue out of one skull, they would fly east, west, north,
    south, and their consent of one direct way should be at once to
    all the points o' th' compass.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man's
   melted away with rotten dews, the fourth would return for
    conscience' sake, to help to get thee a wife.
    no matter, the greater part carries it. I say, if he would
    incline to the people, there was never a worthier man.
    Here he comes, and in the gown of humility. Mark his behaviour.
    We are not to stay all together, but to come by him where he
    therefore follow me, and I'll direct you how you shall go by him.
    I got them in my country's service, when
  MENENIUS. O me, the gods!
    You must not speak of that. You must desire them
    I would they would forget me, like the virtues
                       Re-enter three of the citizens
  CORIOLANUS. Bid them wash their faces
    And keep their teeth clean. So, here comes a brace.
    You know the cause, sir, of my standing here.
  CORIOLANUS. No, sir, 'twas never my desire yet to trouble the poor
  CORIOLANUS. Well then, I pray, your price o' th' consulship?
                                       Exeunt the three citizens
                      Re-enter two other citizens
  CORIOLANUS. Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your
    voices that I may be consul, I have here the customary gown.
    been a rod to her friends. You have not indeed loved the common
  CORIOLANUS. You should account me the more virtuous, that I have
    brother, the people, to earn a dearer estimation of them; 'tis a
    condition they account gentle; and since the wisdom of their
    choice is rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practise
    the insinuating nod and be off to them most counterfeitly. That
    is, sir, I will counterfeit the bewitchment of some popular man
    and give it bountiful to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you I
  FIFTH CITIZEN. We hope to find you our friend; and therefore give
  CORIOLANUS. I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. I
    will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no farther.
    Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
    For truth to o'erpeer. Rather than fool it so,
    Let the high office and the honour go
    The one part suffered, the other will I do.
    joy, and make him good friend to the people!
  ALL. Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul!
  MENENIUS. You have stood your limitation, and the tribunes
    Endue you with the people's voice. Remains
    Anon do meet the Senate.
  CORIOLANUS. Where? At the Senate House?
  CORIOLANUS. May I change these garments?
  BRUTUS. We stay here for the people.
    His humble weeds. Will you dismiss the people?
  BRUTUS. We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.
    Your voices therefore.' When we granted that,
    I have no further with you.' Was not this mockery?
  SICINIUS. Why either were you ignorant to see't,
    But was a petty servant to the state,
    Your liberties and the charters that you bear
    I' th' body of the weal; and now, arriving
    Either his gracious promise, which you might,
    Against the rectorship of judgment?
    Ere now denied the asker, and now again,
  FIRST CITIZEN. I twice five hundred, and their friends to piece
    They have chose a consul that will from them take
    Their liberties, make them of no more voice
    As therefore kept to do so.
  SICINIUS. Let them assemble;
    With what contempt he wore the humble weed;
    After the inveterate hate he bears you.
    Pre-occupied with what you rather must do
    Than what you should, made you against the grain
    To voice him consul. Lay the fault on us.
    Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
    That our best water brought by conduits hither;
    Twice being by the people chosen censor,
    Repent in their election.                   Exeunt plebeians
  BRUTUS. Let them go on;
    With their refusal, both observe and answer
    We will be there before the stream o' th' people;
    And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own,
Cornets. Enter CORIOLANUS, MENENIUS, all the GENTRY, COMINIUS,
TITUS LARTIUS, and other SENATORS
  CORIOLANUS. Tullus Aufidius, then, had made new head?
  CORIOLANUS. So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
    Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road
    Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
    Yielded the town. He is retir'd to Antium.
    That of all things upon the earth he hated
  CORIOLANUS. I wish I had a cause to seek him there,
    Behold, these are the tribunes of the people,
    The tongues o' th' common mouth. I do despise them,
    For they do prank them in authority,
  SICINIUS. Pass no further.
  BRUTUS. It will be dangerous to go on- no further.
  COMINIUS. Hath he not pass'd the noble and the common?
  CORIOLANUS. Are these your herd?
    Must these have voices, that can yield them now
    And straight disclaim their tongues? What are your offices?
    You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth?
    Have you not set them on?
    To curb the will of the nobility;
    The people cry you mock'd them; and of late,
    When corn was given them gratis, you repin'd;
    Scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them
  BRUTUS. Not to them all.
  CORIOLANUS. Have you inform'd them sithence?
  BRUTUS. How? I inform them!
  CORIOLANUS. Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
    For which the people stir; if you will pass
    My nobler friends, I crave their pardons.
    For the mutable, rank-scented meiny, let them
    Therein behold themselves. I say again,
    In soothing them we nourish 'gainst our Senate
    By mingling them with us, the honour'd number,
    Which they have given to beggars.
    Coin words till their decay against those measles
    The very way to catch them.
    A man of their infirmity.
    We let the people know't.
    Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
    Not poison any further.
    Hear you this Triton of the minnows? Mark you
  COMINIUS. 'Twas from the canon.
    Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians,
    If they be senators; and they are no less,
    When, both your voices blended, the great'st taste
    Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate;
    It makes the consuls base; and my soul aches
    Neither supreme, how soon confusion
    May enter 'twixt the gap of both and take
    The one by th' other.
  CORIOLANUS. Though there the people had more absolute pow'r-
    I say they nourish'd disobedience, fed
    The ruin of the state.
  BRUTUS. Why shall the people give
    One that speaks thus their voice?
    More worthier than their voices. They know the corn
    Even when the navel of the state was touch'd,
    They would not thread the gates. This kind of service
    Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd
    Most valour, spoke not for them. Th' accusation
    Which they have often made against the Senate,
    All cause unborn, could never be the native
    Of our so frank donation. Well, what then?
    What's like to be their words: 'We did request it;
    We are the greater poll, and in true fear
    The nature of our seats, and make the rabble
    Break ope the locks o' th' Senate and bring in
    The crows to peck the eagles.
    Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
    Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
    Real necessities, and give way the while
    That love the fundamental part of state
    More than you doubt the change on't; that prefer
    The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick
    The sweet which is their poison. Your dishonour
    Mangles true judgment, and bereaves the state
    Not having the power to do the good it would,
  CORIOLANUS. Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee!
    What should the people do with these bald tribunes,
    On whom depending, their obedience fails
    To the greater bench? In a rebellion,
    Then were they chosen; in a better hour
    And throw their power i' th' dust.
  SICINIUS. Go call the people,  [Exit AEDILE]  in whose name myself
    Attach thee as a traitorous innovator,
    A foe to th' public weal. Obey, I charge thee,
              Enter a rabble of plebeians, with the AEDILES
    This is the way to kindle, not to quench.
  FIRST SENATOR. To unbuild the city, and to lay all flat.
  SICINIUS. What is the city but the people?
    The people are the city.
  BRUTUS. By the consent of all we were establish'd
  COMINIUS. That is the way to lay the city flat,
    To bring the roof to the foundation,
    Upon the part o' th' people, in whose power
    We were elected theirs: Marcius is worthy
    Bear him to th' rock Tarpeian, and from thence
    Where the disease is violent. Lay hands upon him
    And bear him to the rock.
                      [In this mutiny the TRIBUNES, the AEDILES,
                                     and the people are beat in]
    I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house;
  CORIOLANUS. I would they were barbarians, as they are,
    Though in Rome litter'd; not Romans, as they are not,
    One time will owe another.
    I could beat forty of them.
    Take up a brace o' th' best of them; yea, the two tribunes.
    Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend
    What they are us'd to bear.
    I'll try whether my old wit be in request
                     Exeunt CORIOLANUS and COMINIUS, with others
  MENENIUS. His nature is too noble for the world:
    He heard the name of death.                 [A noise within]
  PATRICIANS. I would they were a-bed.
  MENENIUS. I would they were in Tiber.
    What the vengeance, could he not speak 'em fair?
            Re-enter BRUTUS and SICINIUS, the rabble again
    That would depopulate the city and
  SICINIUS. He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
    And therefore law shall scorn him further trial
    Than the severity of the public power,
    The noble tribunes are the people's mouths,
    And we their hands.
    As I do know the consul's worthiness,
  MENENIUS. If, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people,
    The which shall turn you to no further harm
  SICINIUS. Speak briefly, then,
    Our certain death; therefore it is decreed
  MENENIUS. Now the good gods forbid
    Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost-
  SICINIUS. The service of the foot,
    Being once gangren'd, is not then respected
    Pursue him to his house and pluck him thence,
    Spread further.
    In bolted language; meal and bran together
    It is the humane way; the other course
    Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
    Unknown to the beginning.
    Be you then as the people's officer.
  SICINIUS. Meet on the market-place. We'll attend you there;
    [To the SENATORS]  Let me desire your company; he must come,
  CORIOLANUS. Let them pull all about mine ears, present me
    Death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels;
    Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
    That the precipitation might down stretch
    Below the beam of sight; yet will I still
    Be thus to them.
  FIRST PATRICIAN. You do the nobler.
  CORIOLANUS. I muse my mother
    Does not approve me further, who was wont
    To call them woollen vassals, things created
    False to my nature? Rather say I play
  VOLUMNIA. You might have been enough the man you are
    You had not show'd them how ye were dispos'd,
    Ere they lack'd power to cross you.
  CORIOLANUS. Let them hang.
                    Enter MENENIUS with the SENATORS
    Cleave in the midst and perish.
    For the whole state, I would put mine armour on,
  CORIOLANUS. Well, what then, what then?
  CORIOLANUS. For them! I cannot do it to the gods;
    Must I then do't to them?
    Though therein you can never be too noble
    I' th' war do grow together; grant that, and tell me
    In peace what each of them by th' other lose
    That they combine not there.
    Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles;
    And you will rather show our general louts
    For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard
    Not what is dangerous present, but the los
  VOLUMNIA. I prithee now, My son,
    Go to them with this bonnet in thy hand;
    And thus far having stretch'd it- here be with them-
    Thy knee bussing the stones- for in such busines
    Action is eloquence, and the eyes of th' ignorant
    More learned than the ears- waving thy head,
    Now humble as the ripest mulberry
    That will not hold the handling. Or say to them
    Thou art their soldier and, being bred in broils,
    Hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess,
    Were fit for thee to use, as they to claim,
    In asking their good loves; but thou wilt frame
    Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far
    Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours;
    For they have pardons, being ask'd, as free
  VOLUMNIA. Prithee now,
    Go, and be rul'd; although I know thou hadst rather
    Can thereto frame his spirit.
    Prithee now, say you will, and go about it.
  CORIOLANUS. Must I go show them my unbarb'd sconce? Must I
    Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
    This mould of Marcius, they to dust should grind it,
    And throw't against the wind. To th' market-place!
  VOLUMNIA. I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said
    My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
    Small as an eunuch or the virgin voice
  VOLUMNIA. At thy choice, then.
    To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour
    Than thou of them. Come all to ruin. Let
    Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear
    Mother, I am going to the market-place;
    Chide me no more. I'll mountebank their loves,
    Cog their hearts from them, and come home belov'd
    Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going.
    I' th' way of flattery further.
    To answer mildly; for they are prepar'd
    Let them accuse me by invention; I
  CORIOLANUS. Well, mildly be it then- mildly.            Exeunt
    Tyrannical power. If he evade us there,
    Enforce him with his envy to the people,
    And that the spoil got on the Antiates
    Of all the voices that we have procur'd,
  SICINIUS. Have you corrected them by tribes?
  SICINIUS. Assemble presently the people hither;
    And when they hear me say 'It shall be so
    I' th' right and strength o' th' commons' be it either
    For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them,
    Insisting on the old prerogative
  AEDILE. I shall inform them.
  BRUTUS. And when such time they have begun to cry,
    Let them not cease, but with a din confus'd
    Enforce the present execution
  SICINIUS. Make them be strong, and ready for this hint,
    When we shall hap to give't them.
    Be rein'd again to temperance; then he speaks
    What's in his heart, and that is there which looks
          Enter CORIOLANUS, MENENIUS and COMINIUS, with others
    Will bear the knave by th' volume. Th' honour'd gods
    Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice
    Throng our large temples with the shows of peace,
                  Re-enter the.AEDILE,with the plebeians
  CORIOLANUS. Shall I be charg'd no further than this present?
    If you submit you to the people's voices,
    Allow their officers, and are content
    Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
  MENENIUS. Consider further,
    Rather than envy you.
  CORIOLANUS. What is the matter,
    I am so dishonour'd that the very hour
  CORIOLANUS. Say then; 'tis true, I ought so.
    For which you are a traitor to the people.
  CORIOLANUS. The fires i' th' lowest hell fold in the people!
    Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune!
    'Thou liest' unto thee with a voice as free
    As I do pray the gods.
  MENENIUS. Is this the promise that you made your mother?
  CORIOLANUS. I'll know no further.
    Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
    Their mercy at the price of one fair word,
    Nor check my courage for what they can give,
    Envied against the people, seeking means
    To pluck away their power; as now at last
    Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
    Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
    That do distribute it- in the name o' th' people,
    And in the power of us the tribunes, we,
    From off the rock Tarpeian, never more
    As enemy to the people and his country.
    As the dead carcasses of unburied men
    Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
    Fan you into despair! Have the power still
    For you the city, thus I turn my back;
                   COMINIUS, MENENIUS, with the other PATRICIANS
                        [They all shout and throw up their caps]
    Attend us through the city.
Rome. Before a gate of the city
with the young NOBILITY of Rome
    With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother,
    To say extremities was the trier of spirits;
    That when the sea was calm all boats alike
    The heart that conn'd them.
  CORIOLANUS. Nay, I prithee, woman-
  VOLUMNIA. Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
    I shall be lov'd when I am lack'd. Nay, mother,
    If you had been the wife of Hercules,
    Droop not; adieu. Farewell, my wife, my mother.
    I have seen thee stern, and thou hast oft beheld
    Heart-hard'ning spectacles; tell these sad women
    As 'tis to laugh at 'em. My mother, you wot well
    Will or exceed the common or be caught
    Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
    With thee awhile; determine on some course
    That starts i' th' way before thee.
  VIRGILIA. O the gods!
  COMINIUS. I'll follow thee a month, devise with the
    And we of thee; so, if the time thrust forth
    O'er the vast world to seek a single man,
    I' th' absence of the needer.
    Thou hast years upon thee, and thou art too full
    Of the wars' surfeits to go rove with one
    Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
    While I remain above the ground you shall
    From these old arms and legs, by the good gods,
    I'd with thee every foot.
Rome. A street near the gate
Enter the two Tribunes, SICINIUS and BRUTUS with the AEDILE
  SICINIUS. Bid them all home; he's gone, and we'll no further.
  SICINIUS. Bid them home.
    Say their great enemy is gone, and they
    Stand in their ancient strength.
  BRUTUS. Dismiss them home.                         Exit AEDILE
    Here comes his mother.
  VIRGILIA.  [To SICINIUS]  You shall stay too. I would I had the
    Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship
    And for Rome's good. I'll tell thee what- yet go!
  SICINIUS. What then?
  VIRGILIA. What then!
    Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!
  VOLUMNIA. 'I would he had!' 'Twas you incens'd the rabble-
    As far as doth the Capitol exceed
    I would the gods had nothing else to do
  MENENIUS. You have told them home,
    well appear'd by your tongue. What's the news in Rome? I have a
    note from the Volscian state, to find you out there. You have
  ROMAN. There hath been in Rome strange insurrections: the people
    against the senators, patricians, and nobles.
  VOLSCE. Hath been! Is it ended, then? Our state thinks not so; they
    are in a most warlike preparation, and hope to come upon them in
    the heat of their division.
    it flame again; for the nobles receive so to heart the banishment
    of that worthy Coriolanus that they are in a ripe aptness to take
    all power from the people, and to pluck from them their tribunes
    for the violent breaking out.
  ROMAN. The day serves well for them now. I have heard it said the
    these wars, his great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no
    from Rome, all tending to the good of their adversaries. Have you
  VOLSCE. A most royal one: the centurions and their charges,
  ROMAN. I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the man, I
    think, that shall set them in present action. So, sir, heartily
  VOLSCE. You take my part from me, sir. I have the most cause to be
  ROMAN. Well, let us go together.
    Of these fair edifices fore my wars
  CITIZEN. He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
    Are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love,
    Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep
    To take the one the other, by some chance,
    And interjoin their issues. So with me:
                     Enter another SERVINGMAN
                 Re-enter the first SERVINGMAN
    Whence are you? Here's no place for you: pray go to the door.
  SECOND SERVANT. Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in his
    out o' th' house. Prithee call my master to him.
  THIRD SERVANT. What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you avoid the
  THIRD SERVANT. Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other
  THIRD SERVANT. What, you will not? Prithee tell my master what a
  CORIOLANUS. Under the canopy.
  THIRD SERVANT. Under the canopy?
             Enter AUFIDIUS with the second SERVINGMAN
    disturbing the lords within.
    Think me for the man I am, necessity
  CORIOLANUS. A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears,
  AUFIDIUS. I know thee not. Thy name?
    To thee particularly, and to all the Volsces,
    Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may
    The extreme dangers, and the drops of blood
    And witness of the malice and displeasure
    The cruelty and envy of the people,
    Have all forsook me, hath devour'd the rest,
    I had fear'd death, of all the men i' th' world
    I would have 'voided thee; but in mere spite,
    Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast
    A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
    Of shame seen through thy country, speed thee straight
    As benefits to thee; for I will fight
    Against my cank'red country with the spleen
    Of all the under fiends. But if so be
    Th'art tir'd, then, in a word, I also am
    My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice;
    Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,
    Since I have ever followed thee with hate,
    It be to do thee service.
    And say ''Tis true,' I'd not believe them more
    Than thee, all noble Marcius. Let me twine
    And scarr'd the moon with splinters; here I clip
    I lov'd the maid I married; never man
    Sigh'd truer breath; but that I see thee here,
    Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars, I tell the
    We have been down together in my sleep,
    Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat-
    Had we no other quarrel else to Rome but that
    Thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all
    Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
    Who now are here, taking their leaves of me
    Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,
    Or rudely visit them in parts remote
    To fright them ere destroy. But come in;
    Let me commend thee first to those that shall
    a cudgel; and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a false report
  SECOND SERVANT. Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in
    but I thought there was more in him than I could think.
  SECOND SERVANT. So did I, I'll be sworn. He is simply the rarest
  FIRST SERVANT. Nay, not so neither; but I take him to be the
    for the defence of a town our general is excellent.
                       Re-enter the third SERVINGMAN
  FIRST SERVANT. He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth
    asked him by any of the senators but they stand bald before him.
    with's hand, and turns up the white o' th' eye to his discourse.
    But the bottom of the news is, our general is cut i' th' middle
    and but one half of what he was yesterday, for the other has half
    by the entreaty and grant of the whole table. He'll go, he says,
    and sowl the porter of Rome gates by th' ears; he will mow all
    not- look you, sir- show themselves, as we term it, his friends,
  THIRD SERVANT. But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again and
    the man in blood, they will out of their burrows, like conies
  THIRD SERVANT. To-morrow, to-day, presently. You shall have the
    drum struck up this afternoon; 'tis as it were parcel of their
    feast, and to be executed ere they wipe their lips.
  SECOND SERVANT. Why, then we shall have a stirring world again.
  FIRST SERVANT. Ay, and it makes men hate one another.
  THIRD SERVANT. Reason: because they then less need one another. The
    They are rising, they are rising.
Enter the two Tribunes, SICINIUS and BRUTUS
  SICINIUS. We hear not of him, neither need we fear him.
    And quietness of the people, which before
    Blush that the world goes well; who rather had,
    Though they themselves did suffer by't, behold
    Our tradesmen singing in their shops, and going
    About their functions friendly.
  MENENIUS. Nay, I hear nothing; his mother and his wife
  CITIZENS. Now the gods keep you!
    Than when these fellows ran about the streets
    A worthy officer i' the war, but insolent,
    Reports the Volsces with several powers
    Are ent'red in the Roman territories,
    And with the deepest malice of the war
    Thrusts forth his horns again into the world,
    And three examples of the like hath been
    Within my age. But reason with the fellow
    And beat the messenger who bids beware
    All to the Senate House; some news is come
    That turns their countenances.
    Go whip him fore the people's eyes- his raising,
  BRUTUS. Rais'd only that the weaker sort may wish
  SECOND MESSENGER. You are sent for to the Senate.
    O'erborne their way, consum'd with fire and took
    What lay before them.
    To melt the city leads upon your pates,
  MENENIUS. What's the news? What's the news?
  COMINIUS. Your temples burned in their cement, and
    He is their god; he leads them like a thing
    Made by some other deity than Nature,
    That shapes man better; and they follow him
    Upon the voice of occupation and
    Before you find it other. All the regions
    The tribunes cannot do't for shame; the people
    Deserve such pity of him as the wolf
    Does of the shepherds; for his best friends, if they
    Should say 'Be good to Rome'- they charg'd him even
    And therein show'd fike enemies.
    If he were putting to my house the brand
    That should consume it, I have not the face
    Is all the policy, strength, and defence,
    That Rome can make against them.
  MENENIUS. Here comes the clusters.
    And is Aufidius with him? You are they
    That made the air unwholesome when you cast
  THIRD CITIZEN. And so did I; and, to say the truth, so did very
    many of us. That we did, we did for the best; and though we
    Good work, you and your cry! Shall's to the Capitol?
    This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,
  BRUTUS. Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
  AUFIDIUS. Do they still fly to th' Roman?
    Your soldiers use him as the grace fore meat,
    Their talk at table, and their thanks at end;
    Unless by using means I lame the foot
    Join'd in commission with him, but either
    Had borne the action of yourself, or else
  AUFIDIUS. I understand thee well; and be thou sure,
    And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,
    And the nobility of Rome are his;
    The tribunes are no soldiers, and their people
    Will be as rash in the repeal as hasty
    To expel him thence. I think he'll be to Rome
    As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it
    A noble servant to them, but he could not
    Carry his honours even. Whether 'twas pride,
    The happy man; whether defect of judgment,
    To fail in the disposing of those chances
    Which he was lord of; or whether nature,
    Not to be other than one thing, not moving
    Even with the same austerity and garb
    As he controll'd the war; but one of these-
    As he hath spices of them all- not all,
    To choke it in the utt'rance. So our virtues
    Lie in th' interpretation of the time;
    Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.
Enter MENENIUS, COMINIUS, SICINIUS and BRUTUS, the two Tribunes, with others
    In a most dear particular. He call'd me father;
    I urg'd our old acquaintance, and the drops
    That we have bled together. 'Coriolanus'
    To one whom they had punish'd.
    He could not stay to pick them in a pile
    I am one of those. His mother, wife, his child,
    And this brave fellow too- we are the grains:
    You are the musty chaff, and you are smelt
    Above the moon. We must be burnt for you.
    More than the instant army we can make,
    Unheard- what then?
    Must have that thanks from Rome after the measure
    The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then
    We pout upon the morning, are unapt
    These pipes and these conveyances of our blood
    And then I'll set upon him.
  BRUTUS. You know the very road into his kindness
    Unless his noble mother and his wife,
    And with our fair entreaties haste them on.           Exeunt
Enter MENENIUS to the WATCH on guard
    Will no more hear from thence.
    And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks
  MENENIUS. I tell thee, fellow,
    Of whom he's chief- with all the size that verity
    I have tumbled past the throw, and in his praise
    Have almost stamp'd the leasing; therefore, fellow,
  MENENIUS. Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius, always
    factionary on the party of your general.
    you have push'd out your gates the very defender of them, and in
    to front his revenges with the easy groans of old women, the
    virginal palms of your daughters, or with the palsied
    think to blow out the intended fire your city is ready to flame
    in with such weak breath as this? No, you are deceiv'd; therefore
    let forth your half pint of blood. Back- that's the utmost of
  CORIOLANUS. What's the matter?
    upon thee. The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy
    particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than thy old father
    look thee, here's water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come
    to thee; but being assured none but myself could move thee, I
    have been blown out of your gates with sighs, and conjure thee to
    thy wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet here; this,
    who, like a block, hath denied my access to thee.
  CORIOLANUS. Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs
    Are servanted to others. Though I owe
    Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison rather
    Your gates against my force. Yet, for I lov'd thee,
    And would have sent it. Another word, Menenius,
    I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius,
  SECOND WATCH. 'Tis a spell, you see, of much power! You know the
  MENENIUS. I neither care for th' world nor your general; for such
    things as you, I can scarce think there's any, y'are so slight.
    He that hath a will to die by himself fears it not from another.
  SECOND WATCH. The worthy fellow is our general; he's the rock, the
Enter CORIOLANUS, AUFIDIUS, and others
  CORIOLANUS. We will before the walls of Rome to-morrow
  AUFIDIUS. Only their ends
    That thought them sure of you.
    Lov'd me above the measure of a father;
    The first conditions, which they did refuse
    Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter
    In the same time 'tis made? I will not.
    My wife comes foremost, then the honour'd mould
    Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows,
    Great nature cries 'Deny not.' Let the Volsces
    And knew no other kin.
  CORIOLANUS. These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.
    Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss
    I carried from thee, dear, and my true lip
    And the most noble mother of the world
    Whilst with no softer cushion than the flint
    I kneel before thee, and unproperly
    Between the child and parent.                       [Kneels]
    Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
    Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds
    Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun,
    I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?
    The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle
    That's curdied by the frost from purest snow,
    With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
    And saving those that eye thee!
    That, if you fail in our request, the blame
    May hang upon your hardness; therefore hear us.
    Are we come hither; since that thy sight, which should
    Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow,
    Making the mother, wife, and child, to see
    The son, the husband, and the father, tearing
    Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort
    Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,
    Our comfort in the country. We must find
    Our wish, which side should win; for either thou
    And bear the palm for having bravely shed
    These wars determine; if I can not persuade thee
    Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
    Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner
    Trust to't, thou shalt not- on thy mother's womb
    That brought thee to this world.
    I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight.
    To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
    Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces
    May say 'This mercy we have show'd,' the Romans
    'This we receiv'd,' and each in either side
    Give the all-hail to thee, and cry 'Be blest
    That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
    Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name
    Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour,
    To imitate the graces of the gods,
    To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' th' air,
    Than can our reasons. There's no man in the world
    More bound to's mother, yet here he lets me prate
    Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy,
    Has cluck'd thee to the wars, and safely home
    Thou art not honest, and the gods will plague thee,
    That thou restrain'st from me the duty which
    To a mother's part belongs. He turns away.
    This is the last. So we will home to Rome,
    This fellow had a Volscian to his mother;
    And then I'll speak a little.
                              [He holds her by the hand, silent]
  CORIOLANUS. O mother, mother!
    What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
    They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O!
    A mother less, or granted less, Aufidius?
    Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife!
    At difference in thee. Out of that I'll work
  CORIOLANUS.  [To the ladies]  Ay, by and by;
    But we will drink together; and you shall bear
    To have a temple built you. All the swords
    finger, there is some hope the ladies of Rome, especially his
    mother, may prevail with him. But I say there is no hope in't;
  SICINIUS. Is't possible that so short a time can alter the
  SICINIUS. He lov'd his mother dearly.
  MENENIUS. So did he me; and he no more remembers his mother now
    grapes; when he walks, he moves like an engine and the ground
  MENENIUS. I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his mother
    shall bring from him. There is no more mercy in him than there is
  MENENIUS. No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto us.
    When we banish'd him we respected not them; and, he returning to
    break our necks, they respect not us.
                         Enter another MESSENGER
  SICINIUS. What's the news?
    No, not th' expulsion of the Tarquins.
  SECOND MESSENGER. As certain as I know the sun is fire.
    Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide
    As the recomforted through th' gates. Why, hark you!
                  [Trumpets, hautboys, drums beat, all together]
    Tabors and cymbals, and the shouting Romans,
    Make the sun dance. Hark you!               [A shout within]
    I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia
    I'd not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!
                                   [Sound still with the shouts]
  SICINIUS. First, the gods bless you for your tidings; next,
  SICINIUS. They are near the city?
  SICINIUS. We'll meet them,
    And help the joy.                                     Exeunt
Rome. A street near the gate
Enter two SENATORS With VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, VALERIA, passing over the stage,
'With other LORDS
  FIRST SENATOR. Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
    Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
    And make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them.
    Unshout the noise that banish'd Marcius,
    Repeal him with the welcome of his mother;
  AUFIDIUS. Go tell the lords o' th' city I am here;
    Deliver them this paper' having read it,
    Bid them repair to th' market-place, where I,
    Even in theirs and in the commons' ears,
    Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse
    Intends t' appear before the people, hoping
    If you do hold the same intent wherein
    We must proceed as we do find the people.
    'Twixt you there's difference; but the fall of either
    Makes the survivor heir of all.
    In mine own person; holp to reap the fame
    To do myself this wrong. Till, at the last,
    The army marvell'd at it; and, in the last,
    As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour
    Of our great action; therefore shall he die,
                trumpets sound, with great shouts of the people]
    Splitting the air with noise.
    Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
    Ere he express himself or move the people
    Here come the lords.
                     Enter the LORDS of the city
    What faults he made before the last, I think
    Might have found easy fines; but there to end
                      the commoners being with him
    The charges of the action. We have made peace
    With no less honour to the Antiates
    Together with the seal o' th' Senate, what
    But tell the traitor in the highest degree
    I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name
    I say your city- to his wife and mother;
    Look'd wond'ring each at others.
  AUFIDIUS. Name not the god, thou boy of tears-
    Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever
    Must give this cur the lie; and his own notion-
    To thrust the lie unto him.
    If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there
    father.
    And trouble not the peace.
    Provok'd by him, you cannot- the great danger
    As the most noble corse that ever herald
    Let's make the best of it.
    Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully;
    Which to this hour bewail the injury,
    Assist.               Exeunt, bearing the body of CORIOLANUS
  CLOTEN, son to the Queen by a former husband
  BELARIUS, a banished lord, disguised under the name of Morgan
  GUIDERIUS and ARVIRAGUS, sons to Cymbeline, disguised under the
  CAIUS LUCIUS, General of the Roman Forces
  TWO GENTLEMEN of the same
    No more obey the heavens than our courtiers
    Still seem as does the King's.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. But what's the matter?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. His daughter, and the heir of's kingdom, whom
    Is outward sorrow, though I think the King
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. None but the King?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. He that hath lost her too. So is the Queen,
    That most desir'd the match. But not a courtier,
    Although they wear their faces to the bent
    Of the King's looks, hath a heart that is not
    Glad at the thing they scowl at.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. He that hath miss'd the Princess is a thing
    And therefore banish'd- is a creature such
    As, to seek through the regions of the earth
    For one his like, there would be something failing
    Crush him together rather than unfold
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. I cannot delve him to the root; his father
    Against the Romans with Cassibelan,
    So gain'd the sur-addition Leonatus;
    Two other sons, who, in the wars o' th' time,
    Died with their swords in hand; for which their father,
    Big of this gentleman, our theme, deceas'd
    As he was born. The King he takes the babe
    Puts to him all the learnings that his time
    Could make him the receiver of; which he took,
    A sample to the youngest; to th' more mature
    A glass that feated them; and to the graver
    Mark it- the eldest of them at three years old,
    I' th' swathing clothes the other, from their nursery
    Which way they went.
    So slackly guarded, and the search so slow
    That could not trace them!
    Or that the negligence may well be laugh'd at,
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. We must forbear; here comes the gentleman,
              Enter the QUEEN, POSTHUMUS, and IMOGEN
    After the slander of most stepmothers,
    Your gaoler shall deliver you the keys
  QUEEN. You know the peril.
    I'll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying
    The pangs of barr'd affections, though the King
    Hath charg'd you should not speak together.             Exit
    I something fear my father's wrath, but nothing-
    And I shall here abide the hourly shot
    But that there is this jewel in the world
    Who to my father was a friend, to me
    Known but by letter; thither write, my queen,
    And with mine eyes I'll drink the words you send,
    If the King come, I shall incur I know not
    This diamond was my mother's; take it, heart;
    But keep it till you woo another wife,
  POSTHUMUS. How, how? Another?
                                              [Puts on the ring]
  IMOGEN. O the gods!
  POSTHUMUS. Alack, the King!
    If after this command thou fraught the court
    And bless the good remainders of the court!
  CYMBELINE. That mightst have had the sole son of my queen!
  IMOGEN. No; I rather added
    Almost the sum he pays.
    [To the QUEEN] They were again together. You have done
    But that my master rather play'd than fought,
    And had no help of anger; they were parted
  IMOGEN. Your son's my father's friend; he takes his part
    I would they were in Afric both together;
    To bring him to the haven; left these notes
  FIRST LORD. Sir, I would advise you to shift a shirt; the violence
    air comes in; there's none abroad so wholesome as that you vent.
  CLOTEN. If my shirt were bloody, then to shift it. Have I hurt him?
    side the town.
  CLOTEN. I would they had not come between us.
    fool you were upon the ground.
    not together; she's a good sign, but I have seen small reflection
  SECOND LORD. [Aside] She shines not upon fools, lest the reflection
  CLOTEN. Come, I'll to my chamber. Would there had been some hurt
  SECOND LORD. [Aside] I wish not so; unless it had been the fall of
  CLOTEN. Nay, come, let's go together.
  IMOGEN. I would thou grew'st unto the shores o' th' haven,
    As offer'd mercy is. What was the last
    That he spake to thee?
  IMOGEN. Senseless linen, happier therein than I!
    Distinguish him from others, he did keep
    Still waving, as the fits and stirs of's mind
  IMOGEN. I would have broke mine eyestrings, crack'd them but
    To look upon him, till the diminution
    The smallness of a gnat to air, and then
    At the sixth hour of morn, at noon, at midnight,
    T' encounter me with orisons, for then
    Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father,
    And like the tyrannous breathing of the north
  IMOGEN. Those things I bid you do, get them dispatch'd.
    I will attend the Queen.
  IACHIMO. Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain. He was then
    been allowed the name of. But I could then have look'd on him
    without the help of admiration, though the catalogue of his
  FRENCHMAN. I have seen him in France; we had very many there could
    behold the sun with as firm eyes as he.
    must be weighed rather by her value than his own, words him, I
    doubt not, a great deal from the matter.
  FRENCHMAN. And then his banishment.
  IACHIMO. Ay, and the approbation of those that weep this lamentable
  PHILARIO. His father and I were soldiers together, to whom I have
    Here comes the Briton. Let him be so entertained amongst you as
    I will leave to appear hereafter, rather than story him in his
  FRENCHMAN. Sir, we have known together in Orleans.
    been put together with so mortal a purpose as then each bore,
  POSTHUMUS. By your pardon, sir. I was then a young traveller;
    rather shunn'd to go even with what I heard than in my every
    action to be guided by others' experiences; but upon my mended
    altogether slight.
  FRENCHMAN. Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrement of swords, and
    by such two that would by all likelihood have confounded one the
    other or have fall'n both.
  IACHIMO. Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference?
    may, without contradiction, suffer the report. It was much like
    attemptable, than any the rarest of our ladies in France.
    If she went before others I have seen as that diamond of yours
    excelled many; but I have not seen the most precious diamond that
    is, nor you the lady.
  POSTHUMUS. More than the world enjoys.
  IACHIMO. Either your unparagon'd mistress is dead, or she's
  POSTHUMUS. You are mistaken: the one may be sold or given, if there
    were wealth enough for the purchase or merit for the gift; the
    other is not a thing for sale, and only the gift of the gods.
  IACHIMO. Which the gods have given you?
  POSTHUMUS. Which by their graces I will keep.
    your brace of unprizable estimations, the one is but frail and
    the other casual; a cunning thief, or a that-way-accomplish'd
    courtier, would hazard the winning both of first and last.
    convince the honour of my mistress, if in the holding or loss of
    of your fair mistress; make her go back even to the yielding, had
  IACHIMO. I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to your
    my wager rather against your confidence than her reputation; and,
    lady in the world.
    lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring that, commend me to the
    court where your lady is, with no more advantage than the
    opportunity of a second conference, and I will bring from thence
  IACHIMO. You are a friend, and therein the wiser. If you buy
  IACHIMO. I am the master of my speeches, and would undergo what's
    Let there be covenants drawn between's. My mistress exceeds in
    goodness the hugeness of your unworthy thinking. I dare you to
  IACHIMO. By the gods, it is one. If I bring you no sufficient
    testimony that I have enjoy'd the dearest bodily part of your
  POSTHUMUS. I embrace these conditions; let us have articles betwixt
    no further your enemy- she is not worth our debate; if she remain
    unseduc'd, you not making it appear otherwise, for your ill
  IACHIMO. Your hand- a covenant! We will have these things set down
    by lawful counsel, and straight away for Britain, lest the
  QUEEN. Whiles yet the dew's on ground, gather those flowers;
    Make haste; who has the note of them?
  CORNELIUS. Pleaseth your Highness, ay. Here they are, madam.
    Commanded of me these most poisonous compounds
    Which are the movers of a languishing death,
    Other conclusions? I will try the forces
    Of these thy compounds on such creatures as
    We count not worth the hanging- but none human-
    To try the vigour of them, and apply
    Allayments to their act, and by them gather
    Besides, the seeing these effects will be
  QUEEN. O, content thee.
  QUEEN. [To PISANIO] Hark thee, a word.
    Will stupefy and dull the sense awhile,
    Then afterward up higher; but there is
    More than the locking up the spirits a time,
    With a most false effect; and I the truer
  QUEEN. No further service, Doctor,
    Until I send for thee.
    I'll tell thee on the instant thou art then
    Is to exchange one misery with another,
                  [The QUEEN drops the box. PISANIO takes it up]
    It is a thing I made, which hath the King
    What is more cordial. Nay, I prithee take it;
    It is an earnest of a further good
    That I mean to thee. Tell thy mistress how
    Who shall take notice of thee. I'll move the King
    As thou'lt desire; and then myself, I chiefly,
    That set thee on to this desert, am bound
    Not to be shak'd; the agent for his master,
    And the remembrancer of her to hold
    The violets, cowslips, and the primroses,
    Bear to my closet. Fare thee well, Pisanio;
    I'll choke myself- there's all I'll do for you.         Exit
  IMOGEN. A father cruel and a step-dame false;
    As my two brothers, happy! but most miserable
    Is the desire that's glorious. Blessed be those,
    How mean soe'er, that have their honest wills,
    Have lost the wager. Boldness be my friend!
    Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight;
    Rather, directly fly.
  IMOGEN. [Reads] 'He is one of the noblest note, to whose
    But even the very middle of my heart
    What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes
    To see this vaulted arch and the rich crop
    The fiery orbs above and the twinn'd stones
    Upon the number'd beach, and can we not
    Contemn with mows the other; nor i' th' judgment,
  IMOGEN. What is the matter, trow?
    Both fill'd and running- ravening first the lamb,
    Longs after for the garbage.
  IACHIMO. Exceeding pleasant; none a stranger there
    The thick sighs from him; whiles the jolly Briton-
    And hear him mock the Frenchman. But heavens know
    To hide me from the radiant sun and solace
  IACHIMO. That others do,
    It is an office of the gods to venge it,
    Than to be sure they do; for certainties
    Either are past remedies, or, timely knowing,
    The remedy then born- discover to me
    To bathe my lips upon; this hand, whose touch,
    Whose every touch, would force the feeler's soul
    Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye,
    Fixing it only here; should I, damn'd then,
    Slaver with lips as common as the stairs
    That mount the Capitol; join gripes with hands
    With labour; then by-peeping in an eye
    Base and illustrious as the smoky light
    That all the plagues of hell should at one time
    Would make the great'st king double, to be partner'd
    So long attended thee. If thou wert honourable,
    Thee and the devil alike.- What ho, Pisanio!-
    The King my father shall be made acquainted
    The credit that thy lady hath of thee
    A lady to the worthiest sir that ever
    For the most worthiest fit! Give me your pardon.
    In the election of a sir so rare,
    Made me to fan you thus; but the gods made you,
    Unlike all others, chaffless. Pray your pardon.
    Your lord; myself and other noble friends
    Are partners in the business.
    The best feather of our wing- have mingled sums
    To buy a present for the Emperor;
    Which I, the factor for the rest, have done
    Of rich and exquisite form, their values great;
    To have them in safe stowage. May it please you
    To take them in protection?
    And pawn mine honour for their safety. Since
    My lord hath interest in them, I will keep them
    To send them to you only for this night;
    I cross'd the seas on purpose and on promise
Enter CLOTEN and the two LORDS
  CLOTEN. Was there ever man had such luck! When I kiss'd the jack,
    then a whoreson jackanapes must take me up for swearing, as if I
    borrowed mine oaths of him, and might not spend them at my
  SECOND LORD. No, my lord; [Aside] nor crop the ears of them.
    had rather not be so noble as I am; they dare not fight with me,
    because of the Queen my mother. Every jackslave hath his bellyful
  CLOTEN. Leonatus? A banish'd rascal; and he's another, whatsoever
  CLOTEN. Is it fit I went to look upon him? Is there no derogation
  SECOND LORD. [Aside] You are a fool granted; therefore your issues,
    That such a crafty devil as is his mother
    Should yield the world this ass! A woman that
    Betwixt a father by thy step-dame govern'd,
    A mother hourly coining plots, a wooer
    More hateful than the foul expulsion is
    Of the divorce he'd make! The heavens hold firm
  IMOGEN. Who's there? My woman? Helen?
  IMOGEN. I have read three hours then. Mine eyes are weak;
    Fold down the leaf where I have left. To bed.
    Take not away the taper, leave it burning;
    I prithee call me. Sleep hath seiz'd me wholly.    Exit LADY
    From fairies and the tempters of the night
                          [Sleeps. IACHIMO comes from the trunk]
    Did softly press the rushes ere he waken'd
    The chastity he wounded. Cytherea,
    And whiter than the sheets! That I might touch!
    How dearly they do't! 'Tis her breathing that
    Perfumes the chamber thus. The flame o' th' taper
    Under these windows white and azure, lac'd
    To note the chamber. I will write all down:
    Such and such pictures; there the window; such
    Th' adornment of her bed; the arras, figures-
    Why, such and such; and the contents o' th' story.
    As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard!
    As strongly as the conscience does within,
    A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops
    Will force him think I have pick'd the lock and ta'en
    The tale of Tereus; here the leaf's turn'd down
    To th' trunk again, and shut the spring of it.
    Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning
    May bare the raven's eye! I lodge in fear;
    One, two, three. Time, time!             Exit into the trunk
  FIRST LORD. Your lordship is the most patient man in loss, the most
  FIRST LORD. But not every man patient after the noble temper of
    music a mornings; they say it will penetrate.
    it- and then let her consider.
      Hark, hark! the lark at heaven's gate sings,
        To ope their golden eyes.
    the better; if it do not, it is a vice in her ears which
    horsehairs and calves' guts, nor the voice of unpaved eunuch to
  SECOND LORD. Here comes the King.
  CLOTEN. I am glad I was up so late, for that's the reason I was up
    fatherly.- Good morrow to your Majesty and to my gracious mother.
  CYMBELINE. Attend you here the door of our stern daughter?
    Must wear the print of his remembrance out,
    And then she's yours.
    With aptness of the season; make denials
    And therein you are senseless.
    According to the honour of his sender;
    Attend the Queen and us; we shall have need
    If I do line one of their hands? 'Tis gold
    Diana's rangers false themselves, yield up
    Which makes the true man kill'd and saves the thief;
    I yet not understand the case myself.
  LADY. Who's there that knocks?
    And scarce can spare them.
    And am so near the lack of charity
    To accuse myself I hate you; which I had rather
    Obedience, which you owe your father. For
    Yet who than he more mean?- to knit their souls-
    On whom there is no more dependency
    Wert thou the son of Jupiter, and no more
    Even to the point of envy, if 'twere made
    To be but nam'd of thee. His mean'st garment
    In my respect than all the hairs above thee,
    Were they all made such men. How now, Pisanio!
  CLOTEN. 'His garments'! Now the devil-
  IMOGEN. To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently.
  CLOTEN. I will inform your father.
  IMOGEN. Your mother too.
    But the worst of me. So I leave you, sir,
    To win the King as I am bold her honour
  POSTHUMUS. Not any; but abide the change of time,
    Quake in the present winter's state, and wish
    That warmer days would come. In these fear'd hopes
    I barely gratify your love; they failing,
    He'll grant the tribute, send th' arrearages,
    Is yet fresh in their grief.
    Smil'd at their lack of skill, but found their courage
    Now mingled with their courages, will make known
    To their approvers they are people such
    That mend upon the world.
    And winds of all the comers kiss'd your sails,
  POSTHUMUS. I hope the briefness of your answer made
    Is one of the fairest that I have look'd upon.
  POSTHUMUS. And therewithal the best; or let her beauty
    And be false with them.
  PHILARIO. Was Caius Lucius in the Britain court
    When you were there?
  IACHIMO. He was expected then,
    I should have lost the worth of it in gold.
    Was mine in Britain; for the ring is won.
    We were to question farther; but I now
    Profess myself the winner of her honour,
    Together with your ring; and not the wronger
    And ring is yours. If not, the foul opinion
    To who shall find them.
    Being so near the truth as I will make them,
    With tapestry of silk and silver; the story,
    And Cydnus swell'd above the banks, or for
    Since the true life on't was-
    Or by some other.
  POSTHUMUS. So they must,
    Is south the chamber, and the chimneypiece
    So likely to report themselves. The cutter
    Was as another nature, dumb; outwent her,
    I had forgot them- were two winking Cupids
    Depending on their brands.
    Be given to your remembrance; the description
  IACHIMO. Then, if you can,                [Shows the bracelet]
    To that your diamond; I'll keep them.
                                                [Gives the ring]
    Kills me to look on't. Let there be no honour
    Where there is beauty; truth where semblance; love
    Where there's another man. The vows of women
    Of no more bondage be to where they are made
    Than they are to their virtues, which is nothing.
    'Tis true- nay, keep the ring, 'tis true. I am sure
    All sworn and honourable- they induc'd to steal it!
    Is this: she hath bought the name of whore thus dearly.
    There, take thy hire; and all the fiends of hell
    Divide themselves between you!
    For further satisfying, under her breast-
    Worthy the pressing- lies a mole, right proud
    Another stain, as big as hell can hold,
    Were there no more but it.
  POSTHUMUS. Spare your arithmetic; never count the turns.
    And I will kill thee if thou dost deny
    I will go there and do't, i' th' court, before
    Her father. I'll do something-                          Exit
    Let's follow him and pervert the present wrath
Rome. Another room in PHILARIO'S house
  POSTHUMUS. Is there no way for men to be, but women
    Did call my father was I know not where
    Made me a counterfeit; yet my mother seem'd
    A pudency so rosy, the sweet view on't
    As chaste as unsunn'd snow. O, all the devils!
    The woman's part in me! For there's no motion
    It is the woman's part. Be it lying, note it,
    Why, hers, in part or all; but rather all;
    Not half so old as that. I'll write against them,
    Detest them, curse them. Yet 'tis greater skill
    In a true hate to pray they have their will:
    The very devils cannot plague them better.              Exit
and at another CAIUS LUCIUS and attendants
    Be theme and hearing ever- was in this Britain,
    Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately
  QUEEN. And, to kill the marvel,
    Ere such another Julius. Britain is
    Which then they had to take from 's, to resume
    The kings your ancestors, together with
    But suck them up to th' top-mast. A kind of conquest
    Like egg-shells mov'd upon their surges, crack'd
  CLOTEN. Come, there's no more tribute to be paid. Our kingdom is
    stronger than it was at that time; and, as I said, there is no
    moe such Caesars. Other of them may have crook'd noses; but to
  CYMBELINE. Son, let your mother end.
    we pay tribute? If Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket,
    or put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute for light;
    Till the injurious Romans did extort
    Did put the yoke upon's; which to shake of
  CYMBELINE. Say then to Caesar,
    Ordain'd our laws- whose use the sword of Caesar
    Shall, by the power we hold, be our good deed,
    Though Rome be therefore angry. Mulmutius made our laws,
    Who was the first of Britain which did put
    Receive it from me, then: war and confusion
    In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee; look
    I thank thee for myself.
    Much under him; of him I gather'd honour,
    That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for
    Which not to read would show the Britons cold;
    So Caesar shall not find them.
    two, or longer. If you seek us afterwards in other terms, you
    it is yours; if you fall in the adventure, our crows shall fare
    the better for you; and there's an end.
    All the remain is, welcome.                           Exeunt
Britain. Another room in CYMBELINE'S palace
    Upon the love, and truth, and vows, which I
    Shall give thee opportunity.' O damn'd paper,
    Black as the ink that's on thee! Senseless bauble,
    That knew the stars as I his characters-
    He'd lay the future open. You good gods,
    Some griefs are med'cinable; that is one of them,
    You bees that make these locks of counsel! Lovers
    'Justice and your father's wrath, should he take me in his
    dominion, could not be so cruel to me as you, O the dearest of
    How far 'tis thither. If one of mean affairs
    Glide thither in a day? Then, true Pisanio-
    Love's counsellor should fill the bores of hearing
    To th' smothering of the sense- how far it is
    How we may steal from hence; and for the gap
    We'll talk of that hereafter. Prithee speak,
    Where horses have been nimbler than the sands
    She'll home to her father; and provide me presently
    Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them
    That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee;
    Do as I bid thee. There's no more to say;
Enter from the cave BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS
    Instructs you how t' adore the heavens, and bows you
    And keep their impious turbans on without
    Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven!
    We house i' th' rock, yet use thee not so hardly
    Your legs are young; I'll tread these flats. Consider,
    And you may then revolve what tales I have told you
    Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war.
    Than is the full-wing'd eagle. O, this life
    Such gain the cap of him that makes him fine,
    We are beastly: subtle as the fox for prey,
    Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat.
    We make a choir, as doth the prison'd bird,
    Did you but know the city's usuries,
    And felt them knowingly- the art o' th' court,
    The fear's as bad as falling; the toil o' th' war,
    Must curtsy at the censure. O, boys, this story
    first with the best of note. Cymbeline lov'd me;
    And when a soldier was the theme, my name
    And left me bare to weather.
    I was confederate with the Romans. So
    This rock and these demesnes have been my world,
    The venison first shall be the lord o' th' feast;
    To him the other two shall minister;
    In place of greater state. I'll meet you in the valleys.
    How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
    These boys know little they are sons to th' King,
    Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
    They think they are mine; and though train'd up thus meanly
    I' th' cave wherein they bow, their thoughts do hit
    The roofs of palaces, and nature prompts them
    Beyond the trick of others. This Polydore,
    The King his father call'd Guiderius- Jove!
    And thus I set my foot on's neck'; even then
    That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal,
    His own conceiving. Hark, the game is rous'd!
    At three and two years old, I stole these babes,
    Thinking to bar thee of succession as
    Thou wast their nurse; they took thee for their mother,
    They take for natural father. The game is up.           Exit
  IMOGEN. Thou told'st me, when we came from horse, the place
    Was near at hand. Ne'er long'd my mother so
    That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh
    From th' inward of thee? One but painted thus
    Vanquish my staider senses. What's the matter?
  IMOGEN. [Reads] 'Thy mistress, Pisanio, hath play'd the strumpet in
    my bed, the testimonies whereof lie bleeding in me. I speak not
    for me, if thy faith be not tainted with the breach of hers. Let
    thine own hands take away her life; I shall give thee opportunity
    at Milford Haven; she hath my letter for the purpose; where, if
    the pander to her dishonour, and equally to me disloyal.'
    Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue
    Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath
    Rides on the posting winds and doth belie
    All corners of the world. Kings, queens, and states,
    Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave,
    To lie in watch there, and to think on him?
    Thou then look'dst like a villain; now, methinks,
    Whose mother was her painting, hath betray'd him.
    Wilt lay the leaven on all proper men:
    I draw the sword myself; take it, and hit
    Thy master is not there, who was indeed
    Obedient as the scabbard. What is here?
    The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus
    Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor
    That didst set up my disobedience 'gainst the King
    My father, and make me put into contempt the suits
    Will then be pang'd by me. Prithee dispatch.
    The lamp entreats the butcher. Where's thy knife?
  IMOGEN. Do't, and to bed then.
  IMOGEN. Wherefore then
    The time inviting thee? the perturb'd court,
    Th' elected deer before thee?
    To lose so bad employment, in the which
  PISANIO. Not so, neither;
    But if I were as wise as honest, then
    What shall I do the while? where bide? how live?
  IMOGEN. No court, no father, nor no more ado
  IMOGEN. Where then?
    Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night,
    Are they not but in Britain? I' th' world's volume
    In a great pool a swan's nest. Prithee think
    You think of other place. Th' ambassador,
  LUCIUS the Roman, comes to Milford Haven
  PISANIO. Well then, here's the point:
    As quarrelous as the weasel. Nay, you must
    Exposing it- but, O, the harder heart!
    Alack, no remedy!- to the greedy touch
    That answer to them. Would you, in their serving,
  IMOGEN. Thou art all the comfort
    The gods will diet me with. Prithee away!
    A prince's courage. Away, I prithee.
    Your carriage from the court. My noble mistress,
    Here is a box; I had it from the Queen.
    And fit you to your manhood. May the gods
    Direct you to the best!
  IMOGEN. Amen. I thank thee.                   Exeunt severally
    To show less sovereignty than they, must needs
  LUCIUS. Sir, the event
    Is yet to name the winner. Fare you well.
  CYMBELINE. Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords,
    Till he have cross'd the Severn. Happiness!
  CLOTEN. 'Tis all the better;
    Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.
  CYMBELINE. Lucius hath wrote already to the Emperor
    How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
    Before the Roman, nor to us hath tender'd
    The duty of the day. She looks us like
    Since the exile of Posthumus, most retir'd
    Hath her life been; the cure whereof, my lord,
    Her chambers are all lock'd, and there's no answer
  QUEEN. Son, I say, follow the King.
    I have not seen these two days.
    Can make good use of either. She being down,
    I have the placing of the British crown.
    Go in and cheer the King. He rages; none
  QUEEN. All the better. May
    This night forestall him of the coming day!             Exit
    Outsells them all. I love her therefore; but
    Come hither. Ah, you precious pander! Villain,
    Thou art straightway with the fiends.
    No farther halting! Satisfy me home
    At the next word. No more of 'worthy lord'!
    Speak, or thy silence on the instant is
    This paper is the history of my knowledge
    employments wherein I should have cause to use thee with a
    serious industry- that is, what villainy soe'er I bid thee do, to
    perform it directly and truly- I would think thee an honest man;
    thou shouldst neither want my means for thy relief nor my voice
    hast stuck to the bare fortune of that beggar Posthumus, thou
    canst not, in the course of gratitude, but be a diligent follower
  PISANIO. I have, my lord, at my lodging, the same suit he wore when
  CLOTEN. The first service thou dost me, fetch that suit hither. Let
  CLOTEN. Meet thee at Milford Haven! I forgot to ask him one thing;
    I'll remember't anon. Even there, thou villain Posthumus, will I
    kill thee. I would these garments were come. She said upon a
    time- the bitterness of it I now belch from my heart- that she
    held the very garment of Posthumus in more respect than my noble
    and natural person, together with the adornment of my qualities.
    and in her eyes. There shall she see my valour, which will then
    be a torment to her contempt. He on the ground, my speech of
    which, as I say, to vex her I will execute in the clothes that
    she so prais'd- to the court I'll knock her back, foot her home
                Re-enter PISANIO, with the clothes
    Be those the garments?
  PISANIO. She can scarce be there yet.
  CLOTEN. Bring this apparel to my chamber; that is the second thing
    that I have commanded thee. The third is that thou wilt be a
    shall tender itself to thee. My revenge is now at Milford, would
  PISANIO. Thou bid'st me to my loss; for true to thee
Wales. Before the cave of BELARIUS
Enter IMOGEN alone, in boy's clothes
    I have tir'd myself, and for two nights together
    Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick
    When from the mountain-top Pisanio show'd thee,
    Foundations fly the wretched; such, I mean,
    Where they should be reliev'd. Two beggars told me
    That have afflictions on them, knowing 'tis
    Thou art one o' th' false ones. Now I think on thee
    Of hardiness is mother. Ho! who's here?
    But fear the sword, like me, he'll scarcely look on't.
    Such a foe, good heavens!                 Exit into the cave
    Are master of the feast. Cadwal and I
    Will play the cook and servant; 'tis our match.
    But for the end it works to. Come, our stomachs
    Can snore upon the flint, when resty sloth
    Finds the down pillow hard. Now, peace be here,
  BELARIUS. [Looking into the cave] Stay, come not in.
  GUIDERIUS. What's the matter, sir?
    I would have left it on the board, so soon
    With pray'rs for the provider.
  ARVIRAGUS. All gold and silver rather turn to dirt,
  BELARIUS. Whither bound?
  BELARIUS. Prithee, fair youth,
    He is a man. I'll love him as my brother;
    If brothers. [Aside] Would it had been so that they
    Had been my father's sons! Then had my prize
    To thee, Posthumus.
    That did attend themselves, and had the virtue
    Which their own conscience seal'd them, laying by
    Could not out-peer these twain. Pardon me, gods!
    I'd change my sex to be companion with them,
    We'll mannerly demand thee of thy story,
  FIRST SENATOR. This is the tenour of the Emperor's writ:
    That since the common men are now in action
    'Gainst the Pannonians and Dalmatians,
    And that the legions now in Gallia are
    Lucius proconsul; and to you, the tribunes,
  TRIBUNE. Is Lucius general of the forces?
    Will tie you to the numbers and the time
    Of their dispatch.
Wales. Near the cave of BELARIUS
  CLOTEN. I am near to th' place where they should meet, if Pisanio
    his mistress, who was made by him that made the tailor, not be
    fit too? The rather- saving reverence of the word- for 'tis said
    a woman's fitness comes by fits. Therein I must play the workman.
    his glass to confer in his own chamber- I mean, the lines of my
    beneath him in fortunes, beyond him in the advantage of the time,
    before her face; and all this done, spurn her home to her father,
    mother, having power of his testiness, shall turn all into my
    sore purpose! Fortune, put them into my hand. This is the very
    description of their meeting-place; and the fellow dares not
Wales. Before the cave of BELARIUS
Enter, from the cave, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, ARVIRAGUS, and IMOGEN
  BELARIUS. [To IMOGEN] You are not well. Remain here in the cave;
  ARVIRAGUS. [To IMOGEN] Brother, stay here.
    Are we not brothers?
  GUIDERIUS. I love thee; I have spoke it.
    How much the quantity, the weight as much
    As I do love my father.
    In my good brother's fault. I know not why
    'My father, not this youth.'
    Cowards father cowards and base things sire base.
    I'm not their father; yet who this should be
    'Tis the ninth hour o' th' morn.
  ARVIRAGUS. Brother, farewell.
    Th' imperious seas breed monsters; for the dish,
  BELARIUS. And shalt be ever.         Exit IMOGEN into the cave
    A smiling with a sigh, as if the sigh
    The smile mocking the sigh that it would fly
    Mingle their spurs together.
    And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine
    His perishing root with the increasing vine!
  BELARIUS. It is great morning. Come, away! Who's there?
    Cloten, the son o' th' Queen. I fear some ambush.
    I saw him not these many years, and yet
  GUIDERIUS. He is but one; you and my brother search
    A law-breaker, a villain. Yield thee, thief.
  GUIDERIUS. To who? To thee? What art thou? Have not I
    Why I should yield to thee.
    Know'st me not by my clothes?
    Who is thy grandfather; he made those clothes,
    Which, as it seems, make thee.
    My tailor made them not.
  GUIDERIUS. Hence, then, and thank
    The man that gave them thee. Thou art some fool;
    I am loath to beat thee.
  CLOTEN. To thy further fear,
  GUIDERIUS. Those that I reverence, those I fear- the wise:
    At fools I laugh, not fear them.
  CLOTEN. Die the death.
    When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
    And on the gates of Lud's Town set your heads.
  ARVIRAGUS. None in the world; you did mistake him, sure.
    Which then he wore; the snatches in his voice,
  ARVIRAGUS. In this place we left them.
    I wish my brother make good time with him,
    Is oft the cease of fear.
    But, see, thy brother.
    Yet I not doing this, the fool had borne
    Son to the Queen, after his own report;
    Displace our heads where- thank the gods!- they grow,
    And set them on Lud's Town.
  GUIDERIUS. Why, worthy father, what have we to lose
    Protects not us; then why should we be tender
    For we do fear the law? What company
    May make some stronger head- the which he hearing,
    To come alone, either he so undertaking
    Or they so suffering. Then on good ground we fear,
    More perilous than the head.
    Come as the gods foresay it. Howsoe'er,
    My brother hath done well.
    To hunt this day; the boy Fidele's sickness
    His head from him. I'll throw't into the creek
    Behind our rock, and let it to the sea
    And tell the fishes he's the Queen's son, Cloten.
    Becomes thee well enough.
    So the revenge alone pursu'd me! Polydore,
    I love thee brotherly, but envy much
    Where there's no profit. I prithee to our rock.
    You and Fidele play the cooks; I'll stay
    In these two princely boys! They are as gentle
    As zephyrs blowing below the violet,
    Their royal blood enchaf'd, as the rud'st wind
    That by the top doth take the mountain pine
    That an invisible instinct should frame them
    Civility not seen from other, valour
    That wildly grows in them, but yields a crop
  GUIDERIUS. Where's my brother?
    I have sent Cloten's clotpoll down the stream,
    In embassy to his mother; his body's hostage
  GUIDERIUS. What does he mean? Since death of my dear'st mother
    And brings the dire occasion in his arms
    That we have made so much on. I had rather
    My brother wears thee not the one half so well
    And worms will not come to thee.
    Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie
    Without a monument!- bring thee all this;
  GUIDERIUS. Prithee have done,
  GUIDERIUS. By good Euriphile, our mother.
    Have got the mannish crack, sing him to th' ground,
    As once to our mother; use like note and words,
    I cannot sing. I'll weep, and word it with thee;
  ARVIRAGUS. We'll speak it, then.
  BELARIUS. Great griefs, I see, med'cine the less, for Cloten
    Together have one dust, yet reverence-
    That angel of the world- doth make distinction
  GUIDERIUS. Pray you fetch him hither.
    When neither are alive.
    We'll say our song the whilst. Brother, begin.
    My father hath a reason for't.
  GUIDERIUS. Come on, then, and remove him.
  GUIDERIUS. Fear no more the heat o' th' sun
               Nor the furious winter's rages;
  ARVIRAGUS. Fear no more the frown o' th' great;
               Thou art past the tyrant's stroke.
             Care no more to clothe and eat;
               To thee the reed is as the oak.
  GUIDERIUS. Fear no more the lightning flash,
             Consign to thee and come to dust.
  GUIDERIUS. No exorciser harm thee!
  ARVIRAGUS. Nor no witchcraft charm thee!
  GUIDERIUS. Ghost unlaid forbear thee!
  ARVIRAGUS. Nothing ill come near thee!
         Re-enter BELARIUS with the body of CLOTEN
    The herbs that have on them cold dew o' th' night
    Are strewings fit'st for graves. Upon their faces.
    You were as flow'rs, now wither'd. Even so
    The ground that gave them first has them again.
    Their pleasures here are past, so is their pain.
  IMOGEN. [Awaking] Yes, sir, to Milford Haven. Which is the way?
    I thank you. By yond bush? Pray, how far thither?
                                               [Seeing the body]
    These flow'rs are like the pleasures of the world;
    This bloody man, the care on't. I hope I dream;
    Which the brain makes of fumes. Our very eyes
    I tremble still with fear; but if there be
    I know the shape of's leg; this is his hand,
    All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
    And mine to boot, be darted on thee! Thou,
    From this most bravest vessel of the world
    Struck the main-top. O Posthumus! alas,
    Pisanio might have kill'd thee at the heart,
    'Tis he and Cloten; malice and lucre in them
    That we the horrider may seem to those
                                    [Falls fainting on the body]
  CAPTAIN. To them the legions garrison'd in Gallia,
    After your will, have cross'd the sea, attending
  CAPTAIN. The Senate hath stirr'd up the confiners
    That promise noble service; and they come
    Under the conduct of bold Iachimo,
    Sienna's brother.
  LUCIUS. When expect you them?
  CAPTAIN. With the next benefit o' th' wind.
    Be muster'd; bid the captains look to't. Now, sir,
  SOOTHSAYER. Last night the very gods show'd me a vision-
    I fast and pray'd for their intelligence- thus:
    I saw Jove's bird, the Roman eagle, wing'd
    From the spongy south to this part of the west,
    There vanish'd in the sunbeams; which portends,
    Or dead or sleeping on him? But dead, rather;
    With the defunct, or sleep upon the dead.
    Let's see the boy's face.
  LUCIUS. He'll then instruct us of this body. Young one,
    That, otherwise than noble nature did,
    Find such another master.
    No harm by it, though the gods hear, I hope
  LUCIUS. Thou dost approve thyself the very same;
    Than thine own worth prefer thee. Go with me.
  IMOGEN. I'll follow, sir. But first, an't please the gods,
    I'll hide my master from the flies, as deep
    As these poor pickaxes can dig; and when
    And rather father thee than master thee.
    Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can,
    By thee to us; and he shall be interr'd
    Some falls are means the happier to arise.            Exeunt
    A fever with the absence of her son;
    The hope of comfort. But for thee, fellow,
    Dost seem so ignorant, we'll enforce it from thee
    Of Roman gentlemen by the Senate sent.
  CYMBELINE. Now for the counsel of my son and queen!
    And meet the time as it seeks us. We fear not
    To yield me often tidings. Neither know
    Even to the note o' th' King, or I'll fall in them.
    All other doubts, by time let them be clear'd:
Wales. Before the cave of BELARIUS
    Have we in hiding us? This way the Romans
    During their use, and slay us after.
    We'll higher to the mountains; there secure us.
    To the King's party there's no going. Newness
    Among the bands-may drive us to a render
    That when they hear the Roman horses neigh,
    Behold their quarter'd fires, have both their eyes
    That they will waste their time upon our note,
    Of many in the army. Many years,
    Though Cloten then but young, you see, not wore him
    From my remembrance. And, besides, the King
    Who find in my exile the want of breeding,
    To have the courtesy your cradle promis'd,
    I and my brother are not known; yourself
    So out of thought, and thereto so o'ergrown,
    I'll thither. What thing is't that I never
    To look upon the holy sun, to have
    I'll take the better care; but if you will not,
    The hazard therefore due fall on me by
    That is my bed too, lads, and there I'll lie.
    Lead, lead. [Aside] The time seems long; their blood thinks scorn
    Till it fly out and show them princes born.           Exeunt
  POSTHUMUS. Yea, bloody cloth, I'll keep thee; for I wish'd
    Must murder wives much better than themselves
    To have them fall no more. You some permit
    And make them dread it, to the doer's thrift.
    And make me blest to obey. I am brought hither
    I'll give no wound to thee. Therefore, good heavens,
    Of these Italian weeds, and suit myself
    Against the part I come with; so I'll die
    For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life
    Pitied nor hated, to the face of peril
    Gods, put the strength o' th' Leonati in me!
    To shame the guise o' th' world, I will begin
Britain. A field of battle between the British and Roman camps
Enter LUCIUS, IACHIMO, and the Roman army at one door, and the British army
at another, LEONATUS POSTHUMUS following like a poor soldier.
and then leaves him
    The Princess of this country, and the air on't
    This lout as he exceeds our lords, the odds
    The battle continues; the BRITONS fly; CYMBELINE is taken.
  BELARIUS. Stand, stand! We have th' advantage of the ground;
    Re-enter POSTHUMUS, and seconds the Britons; they rescue
  LUCIUS. Away, boy, from the troops, and save thyself;
    For friends kill friends, and the disorder's such
  IACHIMO. 'Tis their fresh supplies.
Another part of the field
  LORD. Cam'st thou from where they made the stand?
    Though you, it seems, come from the fliers.
    But that the heavens fought. The King himself
    Of his wings destitute, the army broken,
    And but the backs of Britons seen, an flying,
    Through a strait lane- the enemy, full-hearted,
    Lolling the tongue with slaught'ring, having work
    Merely through fear, that the strait pass was damm'd
  POSTHUMUS. Close by the battle, ditch'd, and wall'd with turf,
    In doing this for's country. Athwart the lane
    With faces fit for masks, or rather fairer
    Made good the passage, cried to those that fled
    For three performers are the file when all
    Accommodated by the place, more charming
    With their own nobleness, which could have turn'd
    Damn'd in the first beginners!- gan to look
    The way that they did and to grin like lions
    Upon the pikes o' th' hunters. Then began
    A rout, confusion thick. Forthwith they fly,
    Chickens, the way which they stoop'd eagles; slaves,
    The strides they victors made; and now our cowards,
    The life o' th' need. Having found the back-door open
    Of the unguarded hearts, heavens, how they wound!
    Some slain before, some dying, some their friends
    Are now each one the slaughterman of twenty.
    Rather to wonder at the things you hear
    Preserv'd the Britons, was the Romans' bane.'
    To-day how many would have given their honours
    To have sav'd their carcasses! took heel to do't,
    For being now a favourer to the Briton,
    But yield me to the veriest hind that shall
    Once touch my shoulder. Great the slaughter is
    Here made by th' Roman; great the answer be
    On either side I come to spend my breath,
    Which neither here I'll keep nor bear again,
    'Tis thought the old man and his sons were angels.
    That gave th' affront with them.
    But none of 'em can be found. Stand! who's there?
    What crows have peck'd them here. He brags his service,
    Than one that's sick o' th' gout, since he had rather
    By th' sure physician death, who is the key
    T' unbar these locks. My conscience, thou art fetter'd
    So children temporal fathers do appease;
    If of my freedom 'tis the main part, take
    Who of their broken debtors take a third,
    A sixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again
    On their abatement; that's not my desire.
    'Tween man and man they weigh not every stamp;
    Though light, take pieces for the figure's sake;
    You rather mine, being yours. And so, great pow'rs,
    And cancel these cold bonds. O Imogen!
    I'll speak to thee in silence.                      [Sleeps]
        LEONATUS, father to POSTHUMUS, an old man attired
          matron, his WIFE, and mother to POSTHUMUS, with
        music before them. Then, after other music, follows
           the two young LEONATI, brothers to POSTHUMUS,
              with wounds, as they died in the wars.
            I died whilst in the womb he stay'd
            Whose father then, as men report
              Thou orphans' father art,
              Moulded the stuff so fair
            That he deserv'd the praise o' th' world
            And to become the geck and scorn
              O' th' other's villainy?
            To th' shining synod of the rest
                     fall on their knees
    Accuse the Thunderer whose bolt, you know,
    Upon your never-withering banks of flow'rs.
    And so, away; no farther with your din
    Was sulpherous to smell; the holy eagle
    Prunes the immortal wing, and cloys his beak,
    A father to me; and thou hast created
    A mother and two brothers. But, O scorn,
    Gone! They went hence so soon as they were born.
    Many dream not to find, neither deserve,
    being dead many years, shall after revive, be jointed to the old
    stock, and freshly grow; then shall Posthumus end his miseries,
    Tongue, and brain not; either both or nothing,
  POSTHUMUS. Over-roasted rather; ready long ago.
  GAOLER. Hanging is the word, sir; if you be ready for that, you are
  POSTHUMUS. So, if I prove a good repast to the spectators, the dish
    pays the shot.
  GAOLER. A heavy reckoning for you, sir. But the comfort is, you
    which are often the sadness of parting, as the procuring of mirth.
    paid too much; purse and brain both empty; the brain the heavier
    for being too light, the purse too light, being drawn of
    heaviness. O, of this contradiction you shall now be quit. O, the
    to come, the discharge. Your neck, sir, is pen, book, and
    counters; so the acquittance follows.
  GAOLER. Indeed, sir, he that sleeps feels not the toothache. But a
  GAOLER. Your death has eyes in's head, then; I have not seen him so
    pictur'd. You must either be directed by some that take upon them
    know, or jump the after-inquiry on your own peril. And how you
  POSTHUMUS. I tell thee, fellow, there are none want eyes to direct
    them the way I am going, but such as wink and will not use them.
  GAOLER. What an infinite mock is this, that a man should have the
    best use of eyes to see the way of blindness! I am sure hanging's
    the way of winking.
  MESSENGER. Knock off his manacles; bring your prisoner to the King.
  GAOLER. I'll be hang'd then.
  POSTHUMUS. Thou shalt be then freer than a gaoler; no bolts for the
    I never saw one so prone. Yet, on my conscience, there are verier
    knaves desire to live, for all he be a Roman; and there be some
    of them too that die against their wills; so should I, if I were
    one. I would we were all of one mind, and one mind good. O, there
  CYMBELINE. Stand by my side, you whom the gods have made
    That the poor soldier that so richly fought,
  PISANIO. He hath been search'd among the dead and living,
    To you, the liver, heart, and brain, of Britain,
    By whom I grant she lives. 'Tis now the time
    Further to boast were neither true nor modest,
    There's business in these faces. Why so sadly
    Will seize the doctor too. How ended she?
    Which, being cruel to the world, concluded
    I will report, so please you; these her women
  CYMBELINE. Prithee say.
    Who is't can read a woman? Is there more?
    Should by the minute feed on life, and ling'ring,
    Her son into th' adoption of the crown;
         Enter LUCIUS, IACHIMO, the SOOTHSAYER, and other
    The Britons have raz'd out, though with the loss
    That their good souls may be appeas'd with slaughter
    Of you their captives, which ourself have granted;
  LUCIUS. Consider, sir, the chance of war. The day
    We should not, when the blood was cool, have threaten'd
    Our prisoners with the sword. But since the gods
  LUCIUS. I do not bid thee beg my life, good lad,
    There's other work in hand. I see a thing
    He leaves me, scorns me. Briefly die their joys
    That place them on the truth of girls and boys.
    I love thee more and more; think more and more
  ARVIRAGUS. One sand another
  BELARIUS. Peace, peace! see further. He eyes us not; forbear.
  BELARIUS. Be silent; let's see further.
    Since she is living, let the time run on
    Or, by our greatness and the grace of it,
    Winnow the truth from falsehood. On, speak to him.
    Which to be spoke would torture thee.
    Whom thou didst banish; and- which more may grieve thee,
    I had rather thou shouldst live while nature will
  IACHIMO. Upon a time- unhappy was the clock
    That struck the hour!- was in Rome- accurs'd
    Those which I heav'd to head!- the good Posthumus-
    Where ill men were, and was the best of all
    Amongst the rar'st of good ones- sitting sadly
    For beauty that made barren the swell'd boast
    A shop of all the qualities that man
    Fairness which strikes the eye-
    Come to the matter.
    And not dispraising whom we prais'd- therein
    And then a mind put in't, either our brags
  IACHIMO. Your daughter's chastity- there it begins.
    Pieces of gold 'gainst this which then he wore
    In suit the place of's bed, and win this ring
    Been all the worth of's car. Away to Britain
    Of your chaste daughter the wide difference
    To make the noble Leonatus mad,
    I having ta'en the forfeit. Whereupon-
    That's due to all the villains past, in being,
    By being worse than they. I am Posthumus,
  CYMBELINE. Does the world go round?
  POSTHUMUS. How comes these staggers on me?
  CYMBELINE. If this be so, the gods do mean to strike me
  IMOGEN. O, get thee from my sight;
    Breathe not where princes are.
    A precious thing! I had it from the Queen.
    I left out one thing which the Queen confess'd,
    Which must approve thee honest. 'If Pisanio
    Do their due functions. Have you ta'en of it?
  POSTHUMUS. Hang there like fruit, my soul,
    Till the tree die!
    Prove holy water on thee! Imogen,
    Thy mother's dead.
    With his sword drawn, foam'd at the mouth, and swore,
    To seek her on the mountains near to Milford;
    I further know not.
  GUIDERIUS. Let me end the story:
    I slew him there.
  CYMBELINE. Marry, the gods forfend!
    Pluck a hard sentence. Prithee, valiant youth,
    With language that would make me spurn the sea,
  CYMBELINE. I am sorry for thee.
  CYMBELINE. Bind the offender,
    This man is better than the man he slew,
    More of thee merited than a band of Clotens
    Had ever scar for. [To the guard] Let his arms alone;
    Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for
  BELARIUS. Have at it then by leave!
    First pay me for the nursing of thy sons,
    Then spare not the old father. Mighty sir,
    These two young gentlemen that call me father,
    And think they are my sons, are none of mine;
    They are the issue of your loins, my liege,
  BELARIUS. So sure as you your father's. I, old Morgan,
    Was all the harm I did. These gentle princes-
    For such and so they are- these twenty years
    Have I train'd up; those arts they have as
    Could put into them. My breeding was, sir, as
    Whom for the theft I wedded, stole these children
    Having receiv'd the punishment before
    For that which I did then. Beaten for loyalty
    The more of you 'twas felt, the more it shap'd
    Unto my end of stealing them. But, gracious sir,
    Two of the sweet'st companions in the world.
    The benediction of these covering heavens
    Fall on their heads like dew! for they are worthy
    If these be they, I know not how to wish
    Of his queen mother, which for more probation
    It was wise nature's end in the donation,
    A mother to the birth of three? Ne'er mother
    You may reign in them now! O Imogen,
    I have got two worlds by't. O my gentle brothers,
    But I am truest speaker! You call'd me brother,
    When I was but your sister: I you brothers,
  CORNELIUS. By the Queen's dram she swallow'd.
    How parted with your brothers? how first met them?
    Why fled you from the court? and whither? These,
    And your three motives to the battle, with
    And all the other by-dependences,
    From chance to chance; but nor the time nor place
    On him, her brothers, me, her master, hitting
    Each object with a joy; the counterchange
    And smoke the temple with our sacrifices.
    [To BELARIUS] Thou art my brother; so we'll hold thee ever.
  IMOGEN. You are my father too, and did relieve me
    Save these in bonds. Let them be joyful too,
    For they shall taste our comfort.
    The soldier that did company these three
    The purpose I then follow'd. That I was he,
    As then your force did. Take that life, beseech you,
    And here the bracelet of the truest princess
    And deal with others better.
    Pardon's the word to all.
    As you did mean indeed to be our brother;
    Appear'd to me, with other spritely shows
    His skill in the construction.
  LUCIUS. Read, and declare the meaning.
    after revive, be jointed to the old stock, and freshly grow;
    then shall Posthumus end his miseries, Britain be fortunate
    Thou, Leonatus, art the lion's whelp;
    Answering the letter of the oracle,
    Personates thee; and thy lopp'd branches point
    To the majestic cedar join'd, whose issue
    Although the victor, we submit to Caesar
    And to the Roman empire, promising
    To pay our wonted tribute, from the which
  SOOTHSAYER. The fingers of the pow'rs above do tune
    Which I made known to Lucius ere the stroke
    Is full accomplish'd; for the Roman eagle,
    Lessen'd herself and in the beams o' th' sun
    His favour with the radiant Cymbeline,
    Which shines here in the west.
  CYMBELINE. Laud we the gods;
    And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils
    Friendly together. So through Lud's Town march;
    And in the temple of great Jupiter
    Set on there! Never was a war did cease,
  Hamlet, son to the former, and nephew to the present king.
  Getrude, Queen of Denmark, mother to Hamlet.
  Ghost of Hamlet's Father.
Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.
at his post; then] Bernardo, [who approaches him].
  Ber. Who's there.?
  Ber. Long live the King!
  Ber. 'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
    The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
  Fran. I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?
  Mar. And liegemen to the Dane.
    What, is Horatio there ?
    With us to watch the minutes of this night,
    When yond same star that's westward from the pole
    The bell then beating one-
  Mar. Peace! break thee off! Look where it comes again!
  Ber. In the same figure, like the King that's dead.
  Ber. Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
    Together with that fair and warlike form
    In which the majesty of buried Denmark
    Did sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak!
  Hor. Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!
    Without the sensible and true avouch
  Mar. Is it not like the King?
    Such was the very armour he had on
    He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
    But, in the gross and scope of my opinion,
    So nightly toils the subject of the land,
    Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
    Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day?
    At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
    Dar'd to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
    Which he stood seiz'd of, to the conqueror;
    Against the which a moiety competent
    To the inheritance of Fortinbras,
    Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
    And carriage of the article design'd,
    Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
    That hath a stomach in't; which is no other,
    So by his father lost; and this, I take it,
    Is the main motive of our preparations,
    The source of this our watch, and the chief head
    Of this post-haste and romage in the land.
  Ber. I think it be no other but e'en so.
    Comes armed through our watch, so like the King
    That was and is the question of these wars.
  Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
    In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
    A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
    The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
    Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
    Disasters in the sun; and the moist star
    And even the like precurse of fierce events,
    As harbingers preceding still the fates
    And prologue to the omen coming on,
    Have heaven and earth together demonstrated
    If there be any good thing to be done,
    That may to thee do ease, and, race to me,
    Extorted treasure in the womb of earth
    (For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death),
    To offer it the show of violence;
    For it is as the air, invulnerable,
  Ber. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.
  Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing
    The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
    Awake the god of day; and at his warning,
    Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
    To his confine; and of the truth herein
  Mar. It faded on the crowing of the cock.
    And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
    The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
    So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
    But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
    Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle.
Flourish. [Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the Queen, Hamlet,
  King. Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
    Together with remembrance of ourselves.
    Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
    Importing the surrender of those lands
    Lost by his father, with all bands of law,
    To our most valiant brother. So much for him.
    Thus much the business is: we have here writ
    His further gait herein, in that the levies,
    Giving to you no further personal power
    To business with the King, more than the scope
    Of these dilated articles allow.            [Gives a paper.]
    And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
    You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
    The head is not more native to the heart,
    The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
    Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
    And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
  King. Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
  King. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
    Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
    Why seems it so particular with thee?
    'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
    No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
    Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
    Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
    For they are actions that a man might play;
    These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
    To give these mourning duties to your father;
    But you must know, your father lost a father;
    That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
    As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
    A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
    To reason most absurd, whose common theme
    Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
    From the first corse till he that died to-day,
    As of a father; for let the world take note
    You are the most immediate to our throne,
    Than that which dearest father bears his son
    Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
  Queen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
    I pray thee stay with us, go not to Wittenberg.
    But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
    And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
    Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd
    Seem to me all the uses of this world!
    Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
    That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
    With which she followed my poor father's body
    My father's brother, but no more like my father
    Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
    Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
  Hor. My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
  Ham. I prithee do not mock me, fellow student.
    I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
    Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
    My father- methinks I see my father.
  Hor. My lord, the King your father.
  Ham. The King my father?
    Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
  Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen
    (Marcellus and Bernardo) on their watch
    In the dead vast and middle of the night
    Been thus encount'red. A figure like your father,
    Appears before them and with solemn march
    Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walk'd
    By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
    Within his truncheon's length; whilst they distill'd
    Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
    In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
    And I with them the third night kept the watch;
    Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
    Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
    The apparition comes. I knew your father.
  Mar. My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.
    But even then the morning cock crew loud,
    And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
    Hold you the watch to-night?
  Ham. I would I had been there.
  Ham. If it assume my noble father's person,
    If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
    Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
    My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well.
    I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
    Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
    Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
Elsinore. A room in the house of Polonius.
    And, sister, as the winds give benefit
  Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,
    A violet in the youth of primy nature,
    In thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes,
    The inward service of the mind and soul
    And therefore must his choice be circumscrib'd
    Unto the voice and yielding of that body
    Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
    May give his saying deed; which is no further
    Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
    And keep you in the rear of your affection,
    Out of the shot and danger of desire.
    If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
    The canker galls the infants of the spring
    Too oft before their buttons be disclos'd,
    And in the morn and liquid dew of youth
    Be wary then; best safety lies in fear.
    As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
    Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
    Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
    I stay too long. But here my father comes.
    The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
    And you are stay'd for. There- my blessing with thee!
    And these few precepts in thy memory
    Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
    Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;
    Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
    For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
    And they in France of the best rank and station
    Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
    And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    Thou canst not then be false to any man.
    Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!
    And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
  Oph. So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.
    What is between you? Give me up the truth.
    Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
    That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
    Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
    With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
    When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
    Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
    Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
    And with a larger tether may he walk
    Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
    Not of that dye which their investments show,
    As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Elsinore. The platform before the Castle.
  Hor. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season
    Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
    Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels,
    And to the manner born, it is a custom
    More honour'd in the breach than the observance.
    Makes us traduc'd and tax'd of other nations;
    That, for some vicious mole of nature in them,
    As in their birth,- wherein they are not guilty,
    By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
    Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
    The form of plausive manners, that these men
    Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
    Their virtues else- be they as pure as grace,
    Shall in the general censure take corruption
    Doth all the noble substance often dout To his own scandal.
    Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
    That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee Hamlet,
    King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me?
    Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre
    Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,
    To cast thee up again. What may this mean
    Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
    With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
  Ham. Why, what should be the fear?
  Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
    Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
    That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
    And there assume some other, horrible form
    That looks so many fadoms to the sea
    Go on. I'll follow thee.
    As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
    I say, away!- Go on. I'll follow thee.
  Mar. Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
Elsinore. The Castle. Another part of the fortifications.
  Ham. Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak! I'll go no further.
  Ghost. I am thy father's spirit,
    Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,
    And for the day confin'd to fast in fires,
    Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
    To tell the secrets of my prison house,
    Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
    Like quills upon the fretful porpentine.
    If thou didst ever thy dear father love-
  Ghost. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murther.
  Ham. Murther?
  Ghost. Murther most foul, as in the best it is;
    As meditation or the thoughts of love,
  Ghost. I find thee apt;
    And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
    That rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
    A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
    The serpent that did sting thy father's life
    O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
    O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there,
    That it went hand in hand even with the vow
    But soft! methinks I scent the morning air.
    My custom always of the afternoon,
    And in the porches of my ears did pour
    The natural gates and alleys of the body,
    Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
    Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
  Ghost. If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
    Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
    Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven,
    To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
    The glowworm shows the matin to be near
    But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
    In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
    Yea, from the table of my memory
    That youth and observation copied there,
    Within the book and volume of my brain,
    So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word:
  Ham. How say you then? Would heart of man once think it?
  Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
  Ham. Why, right! You are in the right!
  Ham. I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
  Ham. Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
                 Ghost cries under the stage.
  Ham. Aha boy, say'st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?
    Come on! You hear this fellow in the cellarage.
  Hor. Propose the oath, my lord.
    Come hither, gentlemen,
  Ham. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
    Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'
    God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;
    Nay, come, let's go together.
Elsinore. A room in the house of Polonius.
  Pol. Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
    And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
    That they do know my son, come you more nearer
    As thus, 'I know his father and his friends,
    Addicted so and so'; and there put on him
  Pol. Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
    You must not put another scandal on him,
    That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so quaintly
    That they may seem the taints of liberty,
    You laying these slight sullies on my son
    Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
    The youth you breathe of guilty, be assur'd
    According to the phrase or the addition
  Pol. And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- What was I about to say?
    By the mass, I was about to say something! Where did I leave?
  Rey. At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,' and
  Pol. At 'closes in the consequence'- Ay, marry!
    He closes thus: 'I know the gentleman.
    I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,
    Or then, or then, with such or such; and, as you say,
    There was 'a gaming; there o'ertook in's rouse;
    Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
    How now, Ophelia? What's the matter?
    Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
  Oph. He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
    Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
    And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
    For out o' doors he went without their help
    And to the last bended their light on me.
  Pol. Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
    This is the very ecstasy of love,
    And leads the will to desperate undertakings
    And meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealousy!
    As it is common for the younger sort
    To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
    Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
    More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
    To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
    Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
    And sure I am two men there are not living
    For the supply and profit of our hope,
    Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
    And here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
    And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
  King. Thou still hast been the father of good news.
    Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
    My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
  King. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
  Queen. I doubt it is no other but the main,
    His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
    Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
    To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
    So levied as before, against the Polack;
    With an entreaty, herein further shown,
    As therein are set down.
    Go to your rest; at night we'll feast together.
    Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
    And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
    Mad let us grant him then. And now remains
    That we find out the cause of this effect-
    Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
    Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
    Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.
                                             [Reads] the letter.
    'To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified
    'In her excellent white bosom, these, &c.'
          'Doubt thou the stars are fire;
            Doubt that the sun doth move;
      'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers; I have not art to
    reckon my groans; but that I love thee best, O most best, believe
    As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
    When I had seen this hot love on the wing
    If I had play'd the desk or table book,
    This must not be.' And then I prescripts gave her,
    Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
    Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
    Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
    Into the madness wherein now he raves,
  Pol. Hath there been such a time- I would fain know that-
    When it prov'd otherwise.?
      be otherwise.
    Within the centre.
  King. How may we try it further?
  Pol. You know sometimes he walks four hours together
    Here in the lobby.
    Be you and I behind an arras then.
    Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
    And he not from his reason fall'n thereon
  Queen. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
  Ham. For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god
  Pol. What is the matter, my lord?
  Pol. I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
  Ham. Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here that old men
    have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes
    purging thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a
    plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which,
  Pol. [aside] Though this be madness, yet there is a method in't.-
   Will You walk out of the air, my lord?
    will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between
  Pol. You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
  Ros. As the indifferent children of the earth.
    On Fortune's cap we are not the very button.
  Ham. Nor the soles of her shoe?
  Ros. Neither, my lord.
  Ham. Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her
  Ham. In the secret parts of Fortune? O! most true! she is a
  Ros. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.
    deserved at the hands of Fortune that she sends you to prison
    hither?
  Ros. Then is the world one.
  Ham. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
  Ham. Why, then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing either good
  Ros. Why, then your ambition makes it one. 'Tis too narrow for your
  Guil. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very substance of
    the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
    heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to th' court? for, by my
  Ham. No such matter! I will not sort you with the rest of my
    dreadfully attended. But in the beaten way of friendship, what
  Ros. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.
    there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties
    have not craft enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen
  Ham. That you must teach me. But let me conjure you by the rights
    of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the
    me, whether you were sent for or no.
  Ham. [aside] Nay then, I have an eye of you.- If you love me, hold
    discovery, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no
    feather. I have of late- but wherefore I know not- lost all my
    heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth,
    seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the
    roof fretted with golden fire- why, it appeareth no other thing
    action how like an angel! in apprehension how like a god! the
    beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! And yet to me what
    neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.
  Ros. My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.
  Ham. Why did you laugh then, when I said 'Man delights not me'?
    entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them
    on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.
  Ham. He that plays the king shall be welcome- his Majesty shall
    have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and
    target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall
    end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose
    lungs are tickle o' th' sere; and the lady shall say her mind
    freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort. What players are
    they?
  Ros. Even those you were wont to take such delight in, the
    tragedians of the city.
  Ham. How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in
  Ros. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
  Ham. Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the
    city? Are they so follow'd?
  Ros. No indeed are they not.
  Ham. How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
  Ros. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is,
    sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top
    the fashion, and so berattle the common stages (so they call
    them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and
    dare scarce come thither.
  Ham. What, are they children? Who maintains 'em? How are they
    escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can
    sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow
    themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means
    are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim
    against their own succession.
  Ros. Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation
    holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was, for a
    while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player
    went to cuffs in the question.
  Guil. O, there has been much throwing about of brains.
  Ham. Do the boys carry it away?
  Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord- Hercules and his load too.
    those that would make mows at him while my father lived give
    little. 'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if
                     Flourish for the Players.
  Guil. There are the players.
    with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players (which I
    entertainment than yours. You are welcome. But my uncle-father
    and aunt-mother are deceiv'd.
  Ham. I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly I
    That great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling
  Ros. Happily he's the second time come to them; for they say an old
  Ham. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it.-
  Pol. The actors are come hither, my lord.
  Pol. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
    Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are
    the only men.
  Pol. What follows then, my lord?
 and then, you know,
    The first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look
    You are welcome, masters; welcome, all.- I am glad to see thee
    valanc'd since I saw thee last. Com'st' thou to' beard me in
    ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last by the
    uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring.- Masters, you are
  Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted;
    or if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleas'd
    not the million, 'twas caviary to the general; but it was (as I
    receiv'd it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in
    the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes,
    there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury,
    nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of
    I chiefly lov'd. 'Twas AEneas' tale to Dido, and thereabout of it
         Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
         When he lay couched in the ominous horse,
         With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
         Bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
         To their lord's murther. Roasted in wrath and fire,
         With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
      But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
      Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
      Which was declining on the milky head
      A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
      The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
      As hush as death- anon the dreadful thunder
      Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
      And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
      Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
      And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
      As low as to the fiends!
  Ham. It shall to the barber's, with your beard.- Prithee say on.
  1. Play. 'But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen-'
  1. Play. 'Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
      Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
      A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up-
      But if the gods themselves did see her then,
      (Unless things mortal move them not at all)
      Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
      And passion in the gods.'
    eyes. Prithee no more!
  Ham. 'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.-
    Good my lord, will you see the players well bestow'd? Do you
    hear? Let them be well us'd; for they are the abstract and brief
    chronicles of the time. After your death you were better have a
    bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.
  Pol. My lord, I will use them according to their desert.
    desert, and who should scape whipping? Use them after your own
    honour and dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
    your bounty. Take them in.
                 Exeunt Polonius and Players [except the First].
    Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play 'The Murther of
    Had he the motive and the cue for passion
    That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
    And cleave the general ear with horrid speech;
    Make mad the guilty and appal the free,
    Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed
    Tweaks me by th' nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
    As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this, ha?
    I should have fatted all the region kites
    That I, the son of a dear father murther'd,
    Have by the very cunning of the scene
    Been struck so to the soul that presently
    They have proclaim'd their malefactions;
    For murther, though it have no tongue, will speak
    With most miraculous organ, I'll have these Players
    Play something like the murther of my father
    I'll tent him to the quick. If he but blench,
    May be a devil; and the devil hath power
    More relative than this. The play's the thing
    Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.         Exit.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
    We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
    And there did seem in him a kind of joy
    To hear of it. They are here about the court,
    And, as I think, they have already order
    To hear and see the matter.
    Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
    And drive his purpose on to these delights.
    For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
    Her father and myself (lawful espials)
    We may of their encounter frankly judge
    And gather by him, as he is behav'd,
    That your good beauties be the happy cause
    Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
    O heavy burthen!
  Ham. To be, or not to be- that is the question:
    Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
    And by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-
    The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks
    To sleep- perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub!
    Must give us pause. There's the respect
    For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
    Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
    The pangs of despis'd love, the law's delay,
    The insolence of office, and the spurns
    With a bare bodkin? Who would these fardels bear,
    But that the dread of something after death-
    No traveller returns- puzzles the will,
    And makes us rather bear those ills we have
    Than fly to others that we know not of?
    And thus the native hue of resolution
    Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
    With this regard their currents turn awry
    And lose the name of action.- Soft you now!
    I pray you, now receive them.
    And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd
    As made the things more rich. Their perfume lost,
    Take these again; for to the noble mind
  Ham. Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform
    honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can
    but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
  Oph. I was the more deceived.
  Ham. Get thee to a nunnery! Why wouldst thou be a breeder of
    me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me.
    beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give
    them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I
    father?
  Ham. Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool
  Ham. If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for thy dowry:
    calumny. Get thee to a nunnery. Go, farewell. Or if thou wilt
    monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go; and quickly too.
    given you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you
    married already- all but one- shall live; the rest shall keep as
    they are. To a nunnery, go.                            Exit.
    Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
    The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
    That suck'd the honey of his music vows,
    And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
    For the demand of our neglected tribute.
    Haply the seas, and countries different,
    But if you hold it fit, after the play
    Let his queen mother all alone entreat him
    And I'll be plac'd so please you, in the ear
    Of all their conference. If she find him not,
Elsinore. hall in the Castle.
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.
  Ham. Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounc'd it to you,
    trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of our
    players do, I had as live the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do
    not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all
    gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say)
    temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the
    tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the groundlings, who
    (for the most part) are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb
  Ham. Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your
    tutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with
    this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
    nature: for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing,
    whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as
    'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show Virtue her own feature,
    scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his
    it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious
    grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance
    o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I
    have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to
    speak it profanely), that, neither having the accent of
    Christians, nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so
    journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated
  Ham. O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns
    speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them
    that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren
    spectators to laugh too, though in the mean time some necessary
    question of the play be then to be considered. That's villanous
    and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go
    How now, my lord? Will the King hear this piece of work?
  Pol. And the Queen too, and that presently.
  Ham. Bid the players make haste, [Exit Polonius.] Will you two
    help to hasten them?
  Both. We will, my lord.                       Exeunt they two.
    For what advancement may I hope from thee,
    To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?
    No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
    And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
    Hath scald thee for herself. For thou hast been
    That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
    As I do thee. Something too much of this I
    There is a play to-night before the King.
    One scene of it comes near the circumstance,
    Which I have told thee, of my father's death.
    I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
    Even with the very comment of thy soul
    If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
    And scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
      Guildenstern, and other Lords attendant, with the Guard
  Ham. They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
  Ham. Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish. I eat the air,
  Ham. It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be
    the players ready.
  Queen. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
  Ham. No, good mother. Here's metal more attractive.
  Pol. [to the King] O, ho! do you mark that?
    For look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died
  Ham. So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a
    yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life
    half a year. But, by'r Lady, he must build churches then; or else
    shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose
    epitaph is 'For O, for O, the hobby-horse is forgot!'
    Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen embracing
    crown, kisses it, pours poison in the sleeper's ears, and
    leaves him. The Queen returns, finds the King dead, and makes
    carried away. The Poisoner wooes the Queen with gifts; she
    seems harsh and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts
  Oph. Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
    they'll tell all.
  Oph. You are naught, you are naught! I'll mark the play.
  Ham. Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
      About the world have times twelve thirties been,
    Queen. So many journeys may the sun and moon
      In neither aught, or in extremity.
      Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
      Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
    King. Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;
      My operant powers their functions leave to do.
    Queen. O, confound the rest!
      None wed the second but who killed the first.
      Purpose is but the slave to memory,
      Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,
      But fill unshaken when they mellow be.
      The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
      The violence of either grief or joy
      Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
      Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
      And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
      Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
      Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
  King. Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in't?
  King. What do you call the play?
  Ham. 'The Mousetrap.' Marry, how? Tropically. This play is the
    image of a murther done in Vienna. Gonzago is the duke's name;
    souls, it touches us not. Let the gall'd jade winch; our withers
    This is one Lucianus, nephew to the King.
    the puppets dallying.
  Ham. So you must take your husbands.- Begin, murtherer. Pox, leave
    thy damnable faces, and begin! Come, the croaking raven doth
                                   Pours the poison in his ears.
    shall see anon how the murtherer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
  Pol. Give o'er the play.
  Ham.   Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
          Thus runs the world away.
    Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my
  Ham. O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand
  Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning?
  Ham.   Aha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders!
         For if the King like not the comedy,
         Why then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
  Guil. No, my lord; rather with choler.
    the doctor; for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps
  Guil. The Queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit
  Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed.
    your mother's commandment; if not, your pardon and my return
    shall be the end of my business.
    answer is I can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say,
    my mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter! My mother, you
  Ham. O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no
    sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.
  Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any
    further trade with us?
  Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers!
    bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to
  Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself
  Ham. Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something
                     Enter the Players with recorders.
    O, the recorders! Let me see one. To withdraw with you- why do
    you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me
  Ham. It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your
    discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.
  Guil. But these cannot I command to any utt'rance of harmony. I
    have not the skill.
    pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my
    lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music,
  Pol. My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.
  Ham. Then will I come to my mother by-and-by.- They fool me to the
    'Tis now the very witching time of night,
    When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out
    And do such bitter business as the day
    Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother!
    To give them seals never, my soul, consent!             Exit.
A room in the Castle.
    With all the strength and armour of the mind
    Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
    Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
    Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
  Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
    Behind the arras I'll convey myself
    To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
    'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
    Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
    It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
    A brother's murther! Pray can I not,
    Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
    Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
    But to confront the visage of offence?
    Can serve my turn? 'Forgive me my foul murther'?
    Of those effects for which I did the murther-
    In the corrupted currents of this world
    And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
    Buys out the law; but 'tis not so above.
    There is no shuffling; there the action lies
    Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
    To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
    Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
    A villain kills my father; and for that,
    He took my father grossly, full of bread,
    'Tis heavy with him; and am I then reveng'd,
    To take him in the purging of his soul,
    As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
  Ham. (within) Mother, mother, mother!
                              [Polonius hides behind the arras.]
  Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?
  Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
  Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.
  Ham. What's the matter now?
  Ham. No, by the rood, not so!
    You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
    And (would it were not so!) you are my mother.
  Queen. Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.
    Where you may see the inmost part of you.
  Queen. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?
            [Makes a pass through the arras and] kills Polonius.
  Ham. Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
  Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,
    As kill a king, and marry with his brother.
                         [Lifts up the arras and sees Polonius.]
    I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
    That blurs the grace and blush of modesty;
    Calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose
    From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
    And sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
    As from the body of contraction plucks
    With tristful visage, as against the doom,
    Is thought-sick at the act.
    That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
    The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
    Hyperion's curls; the front of Jove himself;
    A station like the herald Mercury
    To give the world assurance of a man.
    Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
    The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
    And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
    When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
    And there I see such black and grained spots
    As will not leave their tinct.
    In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
    Over the nasty sty!
  Ham. A murtherer and a villain!
    A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
    A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
    That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
                Enter the Ghost in his nightgown.
    But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
    And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
    Upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
    Would make them capable.- Do not look upon me,
  Ham. Do you see nothing there?
  Ham. Why, look you there! Look how it steals away!
    My father, in his habit as he liv'd!
    Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
  Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain.
    That I have utt'red. Bring me to the test,
    And I the matter will reword; which madness
    Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
    It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
    And do not spread the compost on the weeds
    To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;
    For in the fatness of these pursy times
  Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
    And live the purer with the other half,
    That to the use of actions fair and good
    To the next abstinence; the next more easy;
    For use almost can change the stamp of nature,
    And either [master] the devil, or throw him out
    That I must be their scourge and minister.
    Let the bloat King tempt you again to bed;
    Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
    Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
    To try conclusions, in the basket creep
    And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
    They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
    For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
    But I will delve one yard below their mines
    And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
    I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.-
    Mother, good night.- Indeed, this counsellor
    Good night, mother.
                  [Exit the Queen. Then] Exit Hamlet, tugging in
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
  King. There's matter in these sighs. These profound heaves
    You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
  Queen. Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
    Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit
    Behind the arras hearing something stir,
    It had been so with us, had we been there.
    But, like the owner of a foul disease,
    Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
  Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd;
    The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
    Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
    And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him.
    Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body
    Into the chapel. I pray you haste in this.
    And let them know both what we mean to do
    Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
    As level as the cannon to his blank,
    And hit the woundless air.- O, come away!
Elsinore. A passage in the Castle.
  Ham. But soft! What noise? Who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.
  Ros. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
  Ros. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
    And bear it to the chapel.
    demanded of a sponge, what replication should be made by the son
  Ham. Ay, sir; that soaks up the King's countenance, his rewards,
    his authorities. But such officers do the King best service in
    the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;
  Ros. My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to
    the King.
  Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
  King. I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
    Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
    He's lov'd of the distracted multitude,
    Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
    But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,
  Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
    is but variable service- two dishes, but to one table. That's the
  Ham. A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat
    of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
    the guts of a beggar.
  Ham. In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not
    there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. But indeed, if you
    the stair, into the lobby.
  King. Go seek him there. [To Attendants.]
    For that which thou hast done,- must send thee hence
    The bark is ready and the wind at help,
  Ham. I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for England!
    Farewell, dear mother.
  King. Thy loving father, Hamlet.
  Ham. My mother! Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is
    one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England!
    As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
    After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
    For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
Enter Fortinbras with his Army over the stage.
  For. Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
    Craves the conveyance of a promis'd march
    Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
                                   Exeunt [all but the Captain].
       Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, [Guildenstern,] and others.
  Ham. Good sir, whose powers are these?
  Ham. Who commands them, sir?
  Ham. Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
    That hath in it no profit but the name.
    Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
  Ham. Why, then the Polack never will defend it.
    Will not debate the question of this straw.
    Why the man dies.- I humbly thank you, sir.
    To fust in us unus'd. Now, whether it be
    Makes mouths at the invisible event,
    When honour's at the stake. How stand I then,
    That have a father klll'd, a mother stain'd,
    Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
    Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
    To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
  Gent. She speaks much of her father; says she hears
    Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
    The hearers to collection; they aim at it,
    And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
    Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,
    Indeed would make one think there might be thought,
  Oph. Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
           From another one?
    (Sings) White his shroud as the mountain snow-
         Which bewept to the grave did not go
  Oph. Well, God dild you! They say the owl was a baker's daughter.
  King. Conceit upon her father.
  Oph. Pray let's have no words of this; but when they ask, you what
              All in the morning bedtime,
              And dupp'd the chamber door,
            Let in the maid, that out a maid
            Young men will do't if they come to't
              By Cock, they are to blame.
    choose but weep to think they would lay him i' th' cold ground.
    My brother shall know of it; and so I thank you for your good
    O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
    All from her father's death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,
    When sorrows come, they come not single spies.
    But in battalions! First, her father slain;
    Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
    Thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers
    Without the which we are Pictures or mere beasts;
    Last, and as such containing as all these,
    Her brother is in secret come from France;
    With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
  King. Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
    What is the matter?
    Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste
    And, as the world were now but to begin,
    Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
  Queen. How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!
                    Enter Laertes with others.
  Laer. I thank you. Keep the door.      [Exeunt his Followers.]
    Give me my father!
    Cries cuckold to my father; brands the harlot
    Even here between the chaste unsmirched brows
    Of my true mother.
  King. What is the cause, Laertes,
  Laer. Where is my father?
    To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil
    Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
    That both the world, I give to negligence,
    Most throughly for my father.
  Laer. My will, not all the world!
    And for my means, I'll husband them so well
    If you desire to know the certainty
    Of your dear father's death, is't writ in Your revenge
  King. Will you know them then?
    And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
    Repast them with my blood.
    That I am guiltless of your father's death,
    Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
    Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May!
    After the thing it loves.
         They bore him barefac'd on the bier
    how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his
    remember. And there is pansies, that's for thoughts.
    would give you some violets, but they wither'd all when my father
    And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
    And where th' offence is let the great axe fall.
Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.
  Hor. What are they that would speak with me?
  Servant. Seafaring men, sir. They say they have letters for you.
  Hor. Let them come in.
    I do not know from what part of the world
  Hor. Let him bless thee too.
  Hor. (reads the letter) 'Horatio, when thou shalt have overlook'd
    this, give these fellows some means to the King. They have
    slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple I
    boarded them. On the instant they got clear of our ship; so I
    alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves
    of mercy; but they knew what they did: I am to do a good turn for
    them. Let the King have the letters I have sent, and repair thou
    to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
    light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring
    thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course
    for England. Of them I have much to tell thee. Farewell.
    Come, I will give you way for these your letters,
    And do't the speedier that you may direct me
    To him from whom you brought them.                   Exeunt.
Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.
    That he which hath your noble father slain
    Why you proceeded not against these feats
    But yet to me they are strong. The Queen his mother
    My virtue or my plague, be it either which,-
    That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
    I could not but by her. The other motive
    Is the great love the general gender bear him,
    Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
    Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
    And not where I had aim'd them.
  Laer. And so have I a noble father lost;
    Stood challenger on mount of all the age
    I lov'd your father, and we love ourself,
    This to your Majesty; this to the Queen.
  King. From Hamlet? Who brought them?
  Mess. Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not.
    They were given me by Claudio; he receiv'd them
    Of him that brought them.
  King. Laertes, you shall hear them.
    when I shall (first asking your pardon thereunto) recount the
    What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
  Laer. Know you the hand?
    It warms the very sickness in my heart
    (As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
    Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
    But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
    The rather, if you could devise it so
    That I might be the organ.
    Wherein they say you shine, Your sun of parts
    Did not together pluck such envy from him
    Of the unworthiest siege.
  King. A very riband in the cap of youth-
    I have seen myself, and serv'd against, the French,
    And they can well on horseback; but this gallant
    With the brave beast. So far he topp'd my thought
  Laer. I know him well. He is the broach indeed
    And gem of all the nation.
    If one could match you. The scrimers of their nation
    He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
    If you oppos'd them. Sir, this report of his
  King. Laertes, was your father dear to you?
    Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
  King. Not that I think you did not love your father;
    Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
    There lives within the very flame of love
    As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
    And then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,
    That hurts by easing. But to the quick o' th' ulcer!
    To show yourself your father's son in deed
  King. No place indeed should murther sanctuarize;
    And set a double varnish on the fame
    The Frenchman gave you; bring you in fine together
    Will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,
    Requite him for your father.
    Under the moon, can save the thing from death
  King. Let's further think of this,
    A chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
    Our purpose may hold there.- But stay, what noise,
  Queen. One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
    So fast they follow. Your sister's drown'd, Laertes.
    That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
    But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.
    There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
    Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide
    And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up;
    Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
    Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay
  Laer. Alas, then she is drown'd?
    And therefore I forbid my tears; but yet
    Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
  Other. I tell thee she is; therefore make her grave straight.
  Other. Why, 'tis found so.
    the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act; and an
  Other. Nay, but hear you, Goodman Delver!
  Clown. Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the
    man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is,
    will he nill he, he goes- mark you that. But if the water come to
  Other. But is this law?
  Other. Will you ha' the truth an't? If this had not been a
  Clown. Why, there thou say'st! And the more pity that great folk
    should have count'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves
    more than their even-Christen. Come, my spade! There is no
  Other. Was he a gentleman?
  Clown. 'A was the first that ever bore arms.
  Other. Why, he had none.
  Clown. What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the Scripture?
    put another question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
  Other. Go to!
  Clown. What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the
    shipwright, or the carpenter?
  Other. The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand
    thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the
    church. Argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come!
  Other. Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
  Other. Marry, now I can tell!
  Other. Mass, I cannot tell.
    till doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of
       To contract- O- the time for- a- my behove,
         O, methought there- a- was nothing- a- meet.
  Ham. 'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment hath the daintier
         And hath shipped me intil the land,
  Ham. That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the
    knave jowls it to the ground,as if 'twere Cain's jawbone, that
    did the first murther! This might be the pate of a Politician,
    about the mazzard with a sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution,
    and we had the trick to see't. Did these bones cost no more the
                                      Throws up [another skull].
  Ham. There's another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?
    him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him
    fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of
    his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
    his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth
  Clown. You lie out on't, sir, and therefore 'tis not yours.
    the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.
  Ham. What woman then?
  Clown. For none neither.
  Ham. How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or
    equivocation will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, this three years
    I have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe
    of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls
  Clown. Of all the days i' th' year, I came to't that day that our
  Clown. Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the
  Clown. Why, because 'a was mad. 'A shall recover his wits there;
    or, if 'a do not, 'tis no great matter there.
  Clown. 'Twill not he seen in him there. There the men are as mad as
  Clown. Very strangely, they say.
    pocky corses now-a-days that will scarce hold the laying in, I
  Ham. Why he more than another?
    skull, the King's jester.
  Ham. Let me see. [Takes the skull.] Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him,
    were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your
    favour she must come. Make her laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio,
                                          [Puts down the skull.]
    imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander till he find it
  Ham. No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty
    Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is
    was converted) might they not stop a beer barrel?
    Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
    O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
    Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
    But soft! but soft! aside! Here comes the King-
    The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
    The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
    And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
    Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers,
    Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
  Laer. Must there no more be done?
    We should profane the service of the dead
    May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
  Ham. What, the fair Ophelia?
  Queen. Sweets to the sweet! Farewell.
    Depriv'd thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,
                                             Leaps in the grave.
    Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead
    T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
    Conjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand
    Hamlet the Dane.                    [Leaps in after Laertes.
    I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;
  King. Pluck thein asunder.
             [The Attendants part them, and they come out of the
  Ham. Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
  Queen. O my son, what theme?
  Ham. I lov'd Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
    Could not (with all their quantity of love)
    And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
    Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
    And thus a while the fit will work on him.
    Anon, as patient as the female dove
    What is the reason that you use me thus?
  King. I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
    [To Laertes] Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech.
    We'll put the matter to the present push.-
    Till then in patience our proceeding be.
Elsinore. A hall in the Castle.
  Ham. So much for this, sir; now shall you see the other.
    You do remember all the circumstance?
  Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
    Worse than the mutinies in the bilboes. Rashly-
    Rough-hew them how we will-
    My sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark
    Grop'd I to find out them; had my desire,
    Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew
    That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
    No, not to stay the finding of the axe,
  Ham. Here's the commission; read it at more leisure.
    They had begun the play. I sat me down;
  Ham. An earnest conjuration from the King,
    As love between them like the palm might flourish,
    And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
    That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
    Without debatement further, more or less,
    He should the bearers put to sudden death,
    I had my father's signet in my purse,
    which was the model of that Danish seal;
    Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
    The changeling never known. Now, the next day
  Ham. Why, man, they did make love to this employment!
    They are not near my conscience; their defeat
    Does by their own insinuation grow.
    'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
    Between the pass and fell incensed points
  Ham. Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now upon-
    He that hath kill'd my king, and whor'd my mother;
    In further evil?
    What is the issue of the business there.
  Ham. It will be short; the interim is mine,
    For by the image of my cause I see
    But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
  Ham. [aside to Horatio] Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a
    lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis
    a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
    bonnet to his right use. 'Tis for the head.
  Ham. No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is northerly.
    he has laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter-
    great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
    or calendar of gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of
    memory, and yet but yaw neither in respect of his quick sail.
    But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
  Ham. The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more
  Hor [aside to Hamlet] Is't not possible to understand in another
  Ham. What imports the nomination of this gentleman
  Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him
    by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
    against the which he has impon'd, as I take it, six French
    rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
    so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
    very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
  Ham. What call you the carriages?
  Hor. [aside to Hamlet] I knew you must be edified by the margent
  Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
  Ham. The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could
    carry cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then.
    But on! Six Barbary horses against six French swords, their
    assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the French
    bet against the Danish. Why is this all impon'd, as you call it?
    if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
  Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
  Ham. Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty,
    it is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be
    brought, the gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose,
    shame and the odd hits.
    himself; there are no tongues else for's turn.
  Hor. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.
    and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes
    on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter-
    a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and
    through the most fann'd and winnowed opinions; and do but blow
    them to their trial-the bubbles are out,
    brings back to him, that you attend him in the hall. He sends to
  Ham. I am constant to my purposes; they follow the King's pleasure.
    continual practice. I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not
  Hor. If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their
    repair hither and say you are not fit.
  Ham. Not a whit, we defy augury; there's a special providence in
    the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not to come', if it be
    the readiness is all. Since no man knows aught of what he leaves,
    Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Osric, and Lords, with other
    Who does it, then? His madness. If't be so,
    Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;
    That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
    And hurt my brother.
    And will this brother's wager frankly play.
    Give us the foils. Come on.
  King. Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
    You know the wager?
    Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
    But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.
  Laer. This is too heavy; let me see another.
  King. Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.
    If Hamlet give the first or second hit,
    Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
    Let all the battlements their ordnance fire;
    And in the cup an union shall he throw
    In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups;
    And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
    The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
    The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
    'Now the King drinks to Hamlet.' Come, begin.
    And you the judges, bear a wary eye.
    Give him the cup.
    Come. (They play.) Another hit. What say you?
  King. [aside] It is the poison'd cup; it is too late.
  Ham. Come for the third, Laertes! You but dally.
  Osr. Nothing neither way.
                [Laertes wounds Hamlet; then] in scuffling, they
  King. Part them! They are incens'd.
  Osr. Look to the Queen there, ho!
  Ham. How does the Queen?
  King. She sounds to see them bleed.
  Queen. No, no! the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet!
    The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.                 [Dies.]
  Ham. O villany! Ho! let the door be lock'd.
    No medicine in the world can do thee good.
    In thee there is not half an hour of life.
    Never to rise again. Thy mother's poison'd.
    I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.
    Then, venom, to thy work.                    Hurts the King.
    Follow my mother.                                 King dies.
    Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
  Ham. Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
    To the unsatisfied.
    Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha't.
    Absent thee from felicity awhile,
    To the ambassadors of England gives
    I cannot live to hear the news from England,
    Which have solicited- the rest is silence.             Dies.
    And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
    Why does the drum come hither?
    He never gave commandment for their death.
    You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
    Are here arriv'd, give order that these bodies
    High on a stage be placed to the view;
    And let me speak to the yet unknowing world
    How these things came about. So shall You hear
    And call the noblest to the audience.
    Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage;
    The soldiers' music and the rites of war
    Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
    Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
    Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
            Exeunt marching; after the which a peal of ordnance
  King Henry the Fourth.
  Henry, Prince of Wales, son to the King.
  Prince John of Lancaster, son to the King.
  Sir Michael, a friend to the Archbishop of York.
  Mistress Quickly, hostess of the Boar's Head in Eastcheap.
Enter the King, Lord John of Lancaster, Earl of Westmoreland,
[Sir Walter Blunt,] with others.
    And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
    No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
    Nor Bruise her flow'rets with the armed hoofs
    Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
    Did lately meet in the intestine shock
    The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
    As far as to the sepulchre of Christ-
    Whose arms were moulded in their mother's womb
    To chase these pagans in those holy fields
    For our advantage on the bitter cross.
    And many limits of the charge set down
    But yesternight; when all athwart there came
    Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer,
    Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
    Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
    Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
    Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
  King. It seems then that the tidings of this broil
    Brake off our business for the Holy Land.
  West. This, match'd with other, did, my gracious lord;
    Came from the North, and thus it did import:
    On Holy-rood Day the gallant Hotspur there,
    Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour;
    As by discharge of their artillery
    And shape of likelihood the news was told;
    For he that brought them, in the very heat
    And pride of their contention did take horse,
    Uncertain of the issue any way.
    Stain'd with the variation of each soil
    Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see
    To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Athol,
  King. Yea, there thou mak'st me sad, and mak'st me sin
    Should be the father to so blest a son-
    A son who is the theme of honour's tongue,
    Amongst a grove the very straightest plant;
    Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
    See riot and dishonour stain the brow
    In cradle clothes our children where they lay,
    Will hold at Windsor. So inform the lords;
London. An apartment of the Prince's.
    unbuttoning thee after supper, and sleeping upon benches after
    wouldest truly know. What a devil hast thou to do with the time
    of the day, Unless hours were cups of sack, and minutes capons,
    and clocks the tongues of bawds, and dials the signs of leaping
    houses, and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench in
    superfluous to demand the time of the day.
    by the moon And the seven stars, and not by Phoebus, he, that
    wand'ring knight so fair. And I prithee, sweet wag, when thou art
  Prince. Well, how then? Come, roundly, roundly.
  Fal. Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not us that
    are squires of the night's body be called thieves of the day's
    beauty. Let us be Diana's Foresters, Gentlemen of the Shade,
    Minions of the Moon; and let men say we be men of good
    government, being governed as the sea is, by our noble and chaste
    mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.
  Prince. Thou sayest well, and it holds well too; for the fortune of
    us that are the moon's men doth ebb and flow like the sea, being
    governed, as the sea is, by the moon. As, for proof now: a purse
    and spent with crying 'Bring in'; now ill as low an ebb as the
    foot of the ladder, and by-and-by in as high a flow as the ridge
    of the gallows.
  Fal. By the Lord, thou say'st true, lad- and is not my hostess of
    the tavern a most sweet wench?
  Prince. As the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle- and is not
  Prince. Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?
  Prince. Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?
  Fal. No; I'll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there.
    art heir apparent- But I prithee, sweet wag, shall there be
    thus fubb'd as it is with the rusty curb of old father antic the
  Fal. Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave judge.
  Prince. Thou judgest false already. I mean, thou shalt have the
    hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman.
    well as waiting in the court, I can tell you.
  Fal. Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman hath no lean
  Fal. Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.
  Prince. What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy of Moor
  Fal. Thou hast the most unsavoury similes, and art indeed the most
    comparative, rascalliest, sweet young prince. But, Hal, I prithee
    the Council rated me the other day in the street about you, sir,
    regarded him not; and yet he talk'd wisely, and in the street
  Prince. Thou didst well; for wisdom cries out in the streets, and
    forgive thee for it! Before I knew thee, Hal, I knew nothing; and
    the wicked. I must give over this life, and I will give it over!
    By the Lord, an I do not, I am a villain! I'll be damn'd for
  Prince. I see a good amendment of life in thee- from praying to
    him? This is the most omnipotent villain that ever cried 'Stand!'
    says Sir John Sack and Sugar? Jack, how agrees the devil and thee
  Prince. Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall have his
    the devil his due.
  Poins. Then art thou damn'd for keeping thy word with the devil.
  Prince. Else he had been damn'd for cozening the devil.
  Fal. There's neither honesty, manhood, nor good fellowship in thee,
    nor thou cam'st not of the blood royal if thou darest not stand
  Prince. Well then, once in my days I'll be a madcap.
  Fal. By the Lord, I'll be a traitor then, when thou art king.
  Poins. Sir John, I prithee, leave the Prince and me alone. I will
  Fal. Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion and him the ears
    may be believed, that the true prince may (for recreation sake)
    prove a false thief; for the poor abuses of the time want
    already waylaid; yourself and I will not be there; and when they
    have the booty, if you and I do not rob them, cut this head off
  Prince. How shall we part with them in setting forth?
  Poins. Why, we will set forth before or after them and appoint them
    then will they adventure upon the exploit themselves; which they
    shall have no sooner achieved, but we'll set upon them.
  Prince. Yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by our horses, by
    our habits, and by every other appointment, to be ourselves.
  Poins. Tut! our horses they shall not see- I'll tie them in the
    wood; our wizards we will change after we leave them; and,
    sirrah, I have cases of buckram for the nonce, to immask our
  Prince. Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.
  Poins. Well, for two of them, I know them to be as true-bred
    cowards as ever turn'd back; and for the third, if he fight
    this jest will lie the incomprehensible lies that this same fat
    endured; and in the reproof of this lies the jest.
  Prince. Well, I'll go with thee. Provide us all things necessary
    Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
    Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
    To smother up his beauty from the world,
    By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
    If all the year were playing holidays,
    But when they seldom come, they wish'd-for come,
    And pay the debt I never promised,
Enter the King, Northumberland, Worcester, Hotspur, Sir Walter Blunt,
with others.
    Unapt to stir at these indignities,
    I will from henceforth rather be myself,
    And therefore lost that title of respect
    Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.
  King. Worcester, get thee gone; for I do see
    Either envy, therefore, or misprision
    But I remember, when the fight was done,
    Came there a certain lord, neat and trimly dress'd,
    Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
    And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
    He call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
    Betwixt the wind and his nobility.
    He questioned me, amongst the rest demanded
    I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
    Of guns and drums and wounds- God save the mark!-
    And telling me the sovereignest thing on earth
    Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
    So cowardly; and but for these vile 'guns,
    Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said
    At such a time, with all the rest retold,
    What then he said, so he unsay it now.
    His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer;
    Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March
    Hath lately married. Shall our coffers, then,
    When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
    No, on the barren mountains let him starve!
    But by the chance of war. To prove that true
    Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took
    When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank,
    He did confound the best part of an hour
    Three times they breath'd, and three times did they drink,
    Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks,
    Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds
    And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,
    Bloodstained with these valiant cohabitants.
    Nor never could the noble Mortimer
    I tell thee
    He durst as well have met the devil alone
    Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
  Hot. An if the devil come and roar for them,
    I will not send them. I will after straight
    Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins,
    And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,
    But I will lift the downtrod Mortimer
    As high in the air as this unthankful king,
  North. Brother, the King hath made your nephew mad.
    And when I urg'd the ransom once again
    Of my wive's brother, then his cheek look'd pale,
    Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.
    By Richard that dead is, the next of blood?
  North. He was; I heard the proclamation.
    And then it was when the unhappy King
  Wor. And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth
  Hot. But soft, I pray you. Did King Richard then
    Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
    Heir to the crown?
  Hot. Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king,
    That wish'd him on the barren mountains starve.
    But shall it be that you, that set the crown
    Upon the head of this forgetful man,
    And for his sake wear the detested blot
    Of murtherous subornation- shall it be
    Being the agents or base second means,
    The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?
    To show the line and the predicament
    Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
    Did gage them both in an unjust behalf
    And shall it in more shame be further spoken
    By him for whom these shames ye underwent?
    Into the good thoughts of the world again;
    Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt
    To answer all the debt he owes to you
    Even with the bloody payment of your deaths.
    On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.
    Send danger from the east unto the west,
    So honour cross it from the north to south,
    And let them grapple. O, the blood more stirs
    Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
    To pluck bright honour from the pale-fac'd moon,
    Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
    Where fadom line could never touch the ground,
    And pluck up drowned honour by the locks,
    So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
    But not the form of what he should attend.
  Hot. I'll keep them all.
    By God, he shall not have a Scot of them!
    I'll keep them, by this hand!
    But that I think his father loves him not
    In Richard's time- what do you call the place-
    'Twas where the madcap Duke his uncle kept-
    This fawning greyhound then did proffer me!
    O, the devil take such cozeners!- God forgive me!
    Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
    And make the Douglas' son your only mean
    Shall secretly into the bosom creep
    His brother's death at Bristow, the Lord Scroop.
    And only stays but to behold the face
  North. Before the game is afoot thou still let'st slip.
    And then the power of Scotland and of York
  Wor. And so they shall.
  Wor. Cousin, farewell. No further go in this
  North. Farewell, good brother. We shall thrive, I trust.
  Hot. Uncle, adieu. O, let the hours be short
  1. Car. Heigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, I'll be hang'd.
    Charles' wain is over the new chimney, and yet our horse not
  1. Car. I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle, put a few flocks in the
    point. Poor jade is wrung in the withers out of all cess.
                        Enter another Carrier.
  2. Car. Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that is the
    next way to give poor jades the bots. This house is turned upside
  1. Car. Poor fellow never joyed since the price of oats rose. It
    was the death of him.
  2. Car. I think this be the most villanous house in all London road
  1. Car. Like a tench I By the mass, there is ne'er a king christen
    could be better bit than I have been since the first cock.
  2. Car. Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we leak in
  1. Car. God's body! the turkeys in my pannier are quite starved.
    What, ostler! A plague on thee! hast thou never an eye in thy
    break the pate on thee, I am a very villain. Come, and be hang'd!
    Hast no faith in thee?
  Gads. I prithee lend me this lantern to see my gelding in the
  Gads. I pray thee lend me thine.
    I'll see thee hang'd first!
  2. Car. Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant thee.
    Come, neighbour Mugs, we'll call up the gentlemen. They will
    along with company, for they have great charge.
  Gads. That's even as fair as- 'at hand, quoth the chamberlain'; for
    doth from labouring: thou layest the plot how.
    you yesternight. There's a franklin in the Wild of Kent hath
  Gads. Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas' clerks, I'll
    give thee this neck.
  Cham. No, I'll none of it. I pray thee keep that for the hangman;
  Gads. What talkest thou to me of the hangman? If I hang, I'll make
    and thou knowest he is no starveling. Tut! there are other
    Troyans that thou dream'st not of, the which for sport sake are
    content to do the profession some grace; that would (if matters
    should be look'd into) for their own credit sake make all whole.
    strikers, none of these mad mustachio purple-hued maltworms; but
    zounds, I lie; for they pray continually to their saint, the
    commonwealth, or rather, not pray to her, but prey on her, for
    they ride up and down on her and make her their boots.
  Cham. What, the commonwealth their boots? Will she hold out water
    a castle, cocksure. We have the receipt of fernseed, we walk
  Cham. Nay, by my faith, I think you are more beholding to the night
  Cham. Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false thief.
  Gads. Go to; 'homo' is a common name to all men. Bid the ostler
    bring my gelding out of the stable. Farewell, you muddy knave.
  Prince. He is walk'd up to the top of the hill. I'll go seek him.
    four foot by the squire further afoot, I shall break my wind.
    with the rogue's company. If the rascal have not given me
    Bardolph! Peto! I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further. An
    these rogues, I am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with a
    afoot with me, and the stony-hearted villains know it well
    another! (They whistle.) Whew! A plague upon you all! Give me my
    close to the ground, and list if thou canst hear the tread of
    I'll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot again for all the coin
    in thy father's exchequer. What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?
  Fal. I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse, good king's
  Bar. Case ye, case ye! On with your vizards! There's money of the
    King's coming down the hill; 'tis going to the King's exchequer.
  Fal. You lie, ye rogue! 'Tis going to the King's tavern.
  Prince. Sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane; Ned
    Poins and I will walk lower. If they scape from your encounter,
    then they light on us.
  Peto. How many be there of them?
  Fal. Zounds, will they not rob us?
  Fal. Indeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather; but yet no
  Prince. Well, we leave that to the proof.
  Poins. Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge. When thou
    need'st him, there thou shalt find him. Farewell and stand fast.
                         Enter the Travellers.
    The boy shall lead our horses down the hill;
  Fal. Strike! down with them! cut the villains' throats! Ah,
    whoreson caterpillars! bacon-fed knaves! they hate us youth. Down
    with them! fleece them!
                            Here they rob and bind them. Exeunt.
            Enter the Prince and Poins [in buckram suits].
  Prince. The thieves have bound the true men. Now could thou and I
    rob the thieves and go merrily to London, it would be argument
  Poins. Stand close! I hear them coming.
                       Enter the Thieves again.
  Fal. Come, my masters, let us share, and then to horse before day.
    An the Prince and Poins be not two arrant cowards, there's no
        [As they are sharing, the Prince and Poins set upon
        them. THey all run away, and Falstaff, after a blow or
        two, runs awasy too, leaving the booty behind them.]
    So strongly that they dare not meet each other.
    And lards the lean earth as he walks along.
  Poins. How the rogue roar'd!                           Exeunt.
    be there, in respect of the love I bear your house.' He could be
    contented- why is he not then? In respect of the love he bears
    you undertake is dangerous, the friends you have named uncertain,
    the time itself unsorted, and your whole plot too light for the
    lie. What a lack-brain is this! By the Lord, our plot is a good
    Lord of York commends the plot and the general course of the
    with his lady's fan. Is there not my father, my uncle, and
    Glendower? Is there not, besides, the Douglas? Have I not all
    their letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the next month,
    and are they not some of them set forward already? What a pagan
    sincerity of fear and cold heart will he to the King and lay open
    Hang him, let him tell the King! we are prepared. I will set
    How now, Kate? I must leave you within these two hours.
    Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from thee
    Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth,
    Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks
    And given my treasures and my rights of thee
    In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch'd,
    And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars,
    Cry 'Courage! to the field!' And thou hast talk'd
    And all the currents of a heady fight.
    Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war,
    And thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep,
    Such as we see when men restrain their breath
    On some great sudden hest. O, what portents are these?
    Is Gilliams with the packet gone?
  Hot. Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
    Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.
    I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir
    Away, you trifler! Love? I love thee not;
    I care not for thee, Kate. This is no world
    And pass them current too. Gods me, my horse!
    Well, do not then; for since you love me not,
    I love thee infinitely. But hark you. Kate:
    Whither I go, nor reason whereabout.
    Whither I must, I must; and to conclude,
    I know you wise; but yet no farther wise
    And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.
  Hot. Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate:
    Whither I go, thither shall you go too;
  Prince. Ned, prithee come out of that fat-room and lend me thy hand
    fourscore hogsheads. I have sounded the very bass-string of
    humility. Sirrah, I am sworn brother to a leash of drawers and
    can call them all by their christen names, as Tom, Dick, and
    Francis. They take it already upon their salvation that, though
    I be but Prince of Wales, yet I am the king of courtesy; and tell
    lad of mettle, a good boy (by the Lord, so they call me!), and
    when I am King of England I shall command all the good lads
    you breathe in your watering, they cry 'hem!' and bid you play it
    my life. I tell thee, Ned, thou hast lost much honour that thou
    name of Ned, I give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapp'd even
    now into my hand by an under-skinker, one that never spake other
    a pint of bastard in the Half-moon,' or so- but, Ned, to drive
    away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee do thou stand in some
    the sugar; and do thou never leave calling 'Francis!' that his
    thee a precedent.
  Fran. Anon, anon, sir.- Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralph.
  Prince. Come hither, Francis.
  Prince. Five year! by'r Lady, a long lease for the clinking of
    Pewter. But, Francis, darest thou be so valiant as to play the
  Fran. O Lord, sir, I'll be sworn upon all the books in England I
  Prince. Nay, but hark you, Francis. For the sugar thou gavest me-
  Prince. I will give thee for it a thousand pound. Ask me when thou
  Prince. Wilt thou rob this leathern-jerkin, crystal-button,
  Prince. Why then, your brown bastard is your only drink; for look
  Prince. Away, you rogue! Dost thou not hear them call?
              Here they both call him. The Drawer stands amazed,
    to the guests within. [Exit Francis.] My lord, old Sir John, with
    half-a-dozen more, are at the door. Shall I let them in?
  Prince. Let them alone awhile, and then open the door.
  Prince. Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at the
    match have you made with this jest of the drawer? Come, what's
    the issue?
  Prince. I am now of all humours that have showed themselves humours
    since the old days of goodman Adam to the pupil age of this
    parrot, and yet the son of a woman! His industry is upstairs and
    downstairs, his eloquence the parcel of a reckoning. I am not yet
    of Percy's mind, the Hotspur of the North; he that kills me some
    fourteen,' an hour after, 'a trifle, a trifle.' I prithee call in
    Mortimer his wife. 'Rivo!' says the drunkard. Call in ribs, call
    sew nether-stocks, and mend them and foot them too. A plague of
    all cowards! Give me a cup of sack, rogue. Is there no virtue
    Pitiful-hearted butter, that melted at the sweet tale of the sun!
    If thou didst, then behold that compound.
    forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a shotten herring.
    them is fat, and grows old. God help the while! A bad world, I
  Fal. A king's son! If I do not beat thee out of thy kingdom with a
    dagger of lath and drive all thy subjects afore thee like a flock
  Prince. Why, you whoreson round man, what's the matter?
  Fal. Are not you a coward? Answer me to that- and Poins there?
  Poins. Zounds, ye fat paunch, an ye call me coward, by the
    Lord, I'll stab thee.
  Fal. I call thee coward? I'll see thee damn'd ere I call thee
    thou canst. You are straight enough in the shoulders; you care
    plague upon such backing! Give me them that will face me. Give me
  Prince. What's the matter?
  Fal. What's the matter? There be four of us here have ta'en a
  Fal. I am a rogue if I were not at half-sword with a dozen of them
    two hours together. I have scap'd by miracle. I am eight times
    thrust through the doublet, four through the hose; my buckler cut
    plague of all cowards! Let them speak, If they speak more or less
    than truth, they are villains and the sons of darkness.
  Gads. And bound them.
  Peto. No, no, they were not bound.
  Fal. You rogue, they were bound, every man of them, or I am a Jew
  Fal. And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.
  Prince. What, fought you with them all?
    fifty of them, I am a bunch of radish! If there were not two or
    three and fifty upon poor old Jack, then am I no two-legg'd
  Prince. Pray God you have not murd'red some of them.
  Fal. Nay, that's past praying for. I have pepper'd two of them. Two
    I am sure I have paid, two rogues in buckram suits. I tell thee
    what, Hal- if I tell thee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse.
  Fal. Four, Hal. I told thee four.
    no more ado but took all their seven points in my target, thus.
  Prince. Seven? Why, there were but four even now.
  Fal. Seven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else.
  Prince. [aside to Poins] Prithee let him alone. We shall have more
  Prince. Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.
  Fal. Do so, for it is worth the list'ning to. These nine in buckram
    that I told thee of-
  Poins. Down fell their hose.
    foot and hand, and with a thought seven of the eleven I paid.
  Fal. But, as the devil would have it, three misbegotten knaves in
  Prince. These lies are like their father that begets them- gross as
  Fal. What, art thou mad? art thou mad? Is not the truth the truth?
  Prince. Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal green when
  Fal. What, upon compulsion? Zounds, an I were at the strappado or
    all the racks in the world, I would not tell you on compulsion.
    utter what is like thee!- you tailor's yard, you sheath, you
  Prince. Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again; and when thou
  Prince. We two saw you four set on four, and bound them and were
    masters of their wealth. Mark now how a plain tale shall put you
    in the house. And, Falstaff, you carried your guts away as
    to hack thy sword as thou hast done, and then say it was in
    find out to hide thee from this open and apparent shame?
  Fal. By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye. Why, hear
    you, my masters. Was it for me to kill the heir apparent? Should
    I turn upon the true prince? Why, thou knowest I am as valiant as
    Hercules; but beware instinct. The lion will not touch the true
    instinct. I shall think the better of myself, and thee, during my
    the Lord, lads, I am glad you have the money. Hostess, clap to
    the doors. Watch to-night, pray to-morrow. Gallants, lads, boys,
    hearts of gold, all the titles of good fellowship come to you!
  Prince. Content- and the argument shall be thy running away.
  Host. O Jesu, my lord the Prince!
  Prince. How now, my lady the hostess? What say'st thou to me?
  Host. Marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court at door
    would speak with you. He says he comes from your father.
    back again to my mother.
  Prince. Prithee do, Jack.
    you will not touch the true prince; no- fie!
  Bard. Faith, I ran when I saw others run.
    fight, and persuaded us to do the like.
  Bard. Yea, and to tickle our noses with speargrass to make them
    bleed, and then to beslubber our garments with it and swear it
    was the blood of true men. I did that I did not this seven year
    and wert taken with the manner, and ever since thou hast blush'd
  Bard. My lord, do you see these meteors? Do you behold these
  Bard. What think you they portend?
    eagle's talent in the waist; I could have crept into any
    Sir John Bracy from your father. You must to the court in the
    morning. That same mad fellow of the North, Percy, and he of
    Wales that gave Amamon the bastinado, and made Lucifer cuckold,
    and swore the devil his true liegeman upon the cross of a Welsh
  Fal. Owen, Owen- the same; and his son-in-law Mortimer, and old
  Prince. So did he never the sparrow.
  Prince. Why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him so for
  Fal. I grant ye, upon instinct. Well, he is there too, and one
    to-night; thy father's beard is turn'd white with the news; you
  Prince. Why then, it is like, if there come a hot June, and this
    civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheads as they buy
    hobnails, by the hundreds.
  Fal. By the mass, lad, thou sayest true; it is like we shall have
    afeard? Thou being heir apparent, could the world pick thee out
    thy father. If thou love file, practise an answer.
  Prince. Do thou stand for my father and examine me upon the
  Fal. Well, an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee, now shalt
  Host. O, the Father, how he holds his countenance!
    For tears do stop the floodgates of her eyes.
  Host. O Jesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotry players as
    art accompanied. For though the camomile, the more it is trodden
    on, the faster it grows, yet youth, the more it is wasted, the
    sooner it wears. That thou art my son I have partly thy mother's
    thine eye and a foolish hanging of thy nether lip that doth
    warrant me. If then thou be son to me, here lies the point: why,
    being son to me, art thou so pointed at? Shall the blessed sun of
    ask'd. Shall the son of England prove a thief and take purses? A
    often heard of, and it is known to many in our land by the name
    so doth the company thou keepest. For, Harry, now I do not speak
    to thee in drink, but in tears; not in pleasure, but in passion;
    not in words only, but in woes also: and yet there is a virtuous
    looks. If then the tree may be known by the fruit, as the fruit
    by the tree, then, peremptorily I speak it, there is virtue in
    that Falstaff. Him keep with, the rest banish. And tell me now,
    play my father.
    both in word and matter, hang me up by the heels for a
  Prince. The complaints I hear of thee are grievous.
  Fal. 'Sblood, my lord, they are false! Nay, I'll tickle ye for a
    haunts thee in the likeness of an old fat man; a tun of man is
    guts, that roasted Manningtree ox with the pudding in his belly,
    that reverend vice, that grey iniquity, that father ruffian, that
  Fal. My lord, the man I know.
    more than I know. That he is old (the more the pity) his white
    God help the wicked! If to be old and merry be a sin, then many
    then Pharaoh's lean kine are to be loved. No, my good lord.
    Falstaff, and therefore more valiant being, as he is, old Jack
    Harry's company. Banish plump Jack, and banish all the world!
  Bard. O, my lord, my lord! the sheriff with a most monstrous watch
    is at the door.
  Fal. Out, ye rogue! Play out the play. I have much to say in the
                       Enter the Hostess.
  Prince. Heigh, heigh, the devil rides upon a fiddlestick!
    What's the matter?
  Host. The sheriff and all the watch are at the door. They are come
    to search the house. Shall I let them in?
  Fal. I deny your major. If you will deny the sheriff, so; if not,
    let him enter. If I become not a cart as well as another man, a
    with a halter as another.
  Prince. Go hide thee behind the arras. The rest walk, up above.
  Fal. Both which I have had; but their date is out, and therefore
  Prince. Call in the sheriff.
                            [Exeunt Manent the Prince and Peto.]
                    Enter Sheriff and the Carrier.
  Sher. One of them is well known, my gracious lord-
    And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee
    Send him to answer thee, or any man,
    And so let me entreat you leave the house.
  Prince. It may be so. If he have robb'd these men,
  Peto. Falstaff! Fast asleep behind the arras, and snorting like a
  Prince. Let's see whit they be. Read them.
    intolerable deal of sack! What there is else, keep close; we'll
    the court in the morning . We must all to the wars. and thy place
    in the morning, and so good morrow, Peto.
  Mort. These promises are fair, the parties sure,
    I have forgot the map.
    The frame and huge foundation of the earth
  Hot. Why, so it would have done at the same season, if your
    mother's cat had but kitten'd, though yourself had never been
  Glend. I say the earth did shake when I was born.
  Hot. And I say the earth was not of my mind,
  Glend. The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble.
  Hot. O, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
    In strange eruptions; oft the teeming earth
    By the imprisoning of unruly wind
    Shakes the old beldame earth and topples down
    I do not bear these crossings. Give me leave
    The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
    Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.
    And all the courses of my life do show
    I am not in the roll of common men.
    Where is he living, clipp'd in with the sea
    That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,
    Can trace me in the tedious ways of art
  Hot. I think there's no man speaks better Welsh. I'll to dinner.
  Glend. I can call spirits from the vasty deep.
    But will they come when you do call for them?
  Glend. Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command the devil.
  Hot. And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil-
    By telling truth. Tell truth and shame the devil.
    If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
    O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!
    Against my power; thrice from the banks of Wye
    Bootless home and weather-beaten back.
  Hot. Home without boots, and in foul weather too?
    How scapes he agues, in the devil's name
  Glend. Come, here's the map. Shall we divide our right
    England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,
    All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,
    And all the fertile land within that bound,
    To meet your father and the Scottish bower,
    My father Glendower is not ready yet,
    Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days.
    [To Glend.] Within that space you may have drawn together
    For there will be a world of water shed
    Upon the parting of your wives and you.
    And cuts me from the best of all my land
    I'll have the current ill this place damm'd up,
    And here the smug and sliver Trent shall run
    With like advantage on the other side,
    Gelding the opposed continent as much
    As on the other side it takes from you.
    And then he runs straight and even.
  Hot. Let me not understand you then; speak it in Welsh.
    For I was train'd up in the English court,
    Where, being but young, I framed to the harp
    And gave the tongue a helpful ornament-
    I had rather be a kitten and cry mew
    Than one of these same metre ballet-mongers.
    I had rather hear a brazen canstick turn'd
    Or a dry wheel grate on the axletree,
    'Tis like the forc'd gait of a shuffling nag,
    But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,
    I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair
    Are the indentures drawn? Shall we be gone?
    I'll haste the writer, and withal
  Mort. Fie, cousin Percy! how you cross my father!
    With telling me of the moldwarp and the ant,
    Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,
    In reckoning up the several devils' names
    Worse than a smoky house. I had rather live
    Without the taste of danger and reproof.
    And since your coming hither have done enough
    And that's the dearest grace it renders you-
    Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
    Beguiling them of commendation.
            Enter Glendower with the Ladies.
  Mort. This is the deadly spite that angers me-
    She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.
  Mort. Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy
                                                him in the same.
    Which thou pourest down from these swelling heavens
    In such a Barley should I answer thee.
  Glend. Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
  Glend. She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down
    And she will sing the song that pleaseth you
    And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep,
    As is the difference betwixt day and night
    The hour before the heavenly-harness'd team
    Begins his golden progress in the East.
    Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,
    And straight they shall be here. Sit, and attend.
  Hot. Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh;
    altogether govern'd by humours. Lie still, ye thief, and hear the
  Hot. I had rather hear Lady, my brach, howl in Irish.
  Hot. Neither! 'Tis a woman's fault.
  Lady P. Now God help thee!
  Hot. To the Welsh lady's bed.
                               Here the Lady sings a Welsh song.
    As if thou ne'er walk'st further than Finsbury.
  Hot. 'Tis the next way to turn tailor or be redbreast-teacher. An
    the indentures be drawn, I'll away within these two hours; and so
    And then to horse immediately.
Enter the King, Prince of Wales, and others.
    I know not whether God will have it so,
    For the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven
    Accompany the greatness of thy blood
    And hold their level with thy princely heart?
    Which oft the ear of greatness needs must bear
  King. God pardon thee! Yet let me wonder, Harry,
    Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors.
    Which by thy younger brother is supplied,
    And art almost an alien to the hearts
    Of all the court and princes of my blood.
    Is ruin'd, and the soul of every man
    So common-hackney'd in the eyes of men,
    Opinion, that did help me to the crown,
    That men would tell their children, 'This is he!'
    Others would say, 'Where? Which is Bolingbroke?'
    And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,
    Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths
    Even in the presence of the crowned King.
    Had his great name profaned with their scorns
    To laugh at gibing boys and stand the push
    Grew a companion to the common streets,
    To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little
    He was but as the cuckoo is in June,
    But rather drows'd and hung their eyelids down,
    As cloudy men use to their adversaries,
    Save mine, which hath desir'd to see thee more;
  King. For all the world,
    As thou art to this hour, was Richard then
    And even as I was then is Percy now.
    He hath more worthy interest to the state
    Than thou, the shadow of succession;
    He doth fill fields with harness in the realm,
    Turns head against the lion's armed jaws,
    Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ.
    Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swathling clothes,
    To fill the mouth of deep defiance up
    And shake the peace and safety of our throne.
    But wherefore do I tell these news to thee
    Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes,
    Base inclination, and the start of spleen,
    And God forgive them that so much have sway'd
    And, in the closing of some glorious day,
    And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights,
    Would they were multitudes, and on my head
    My shames redoubled! For the time will come
    That I shall make this Northern youth exchange
    Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,
    Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
    This in the name of God I promise here;
    If not, the end of life cancels all bands,
    Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
  Blunt. So hath the business that I come to speak of.
    That Douglas and the English rebels met
    A mighty and a fearful head they are,
    an old lady's loose gown! I am withered like an old apple John.
    I shall be out of heart shortly, and then I shall have no
    strength to repent. An I have not forgotten what the inside of a
    inside of a church! Company, villanous company, hath been the
  Fal. Why, there is it! Come, sing me a bawdy song; make me merry. I
    admiral, thou bearest the lantern in the poop- but 'tis in the
    nose of thee. Thou art the Knight of the Burning Lamp.
    think upon hellfire and Dives that lived in purple; for there he
    fire, that's God's angel.' But thou art altogether given over,
    and wert indeed, but for the light in thy face, the son of utter
    darkness. When thou ran'st up Gadshill in the night to catch my
    ball of wildfire, there's no purchase in money. O, thou art a
    me a thousand marks in links and torches, walking with thee in
    the night betwixt tavern and tavern; but the sack that thou hast
    drunk me would have bought me lights as good cheap at the dearest
    How now, Dame Partlet the hen? Have you enquir'd yet who pick'd
    tithe of a hair was never lost in my house before.
  Host. Who, I? No; I defy thee! God's light, I was never call'd so
  Fal. Dowlas, filthy dowlas! I have given them away to bakers'
    wives; they have made bolters of them.
  Fal. How? Poor? Look upon his face. What call you rich? Let them
    coin his nose, let them coin his cheeks. I'll not pay a denier.
    seal-ring of my grandfather's worth forty mark.
  Host. O Jesu, I have heard the Prince tell him, I know not how oft,
  Fal. How? the Prince is a Jack, a sneak-cup. 'Sblood, an he were
      Enter the Prince [and Poins], marching; and Falstaff meets
          them, playing upon his truncheon like a fife.
    How now, lad? Is the wind in that door, i' faith? Must we all
  Fal. Prithee let her alone and list to me.
  Fal. The other night I fell asleep here behind the arras and had my
    pocket pick'd. This house is turn'd bawdy house; they pick
    apiece and a seal-ring of my grandfather's.
  Host. There's neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.
  Fal. There's no more faith in thee than in a stewed prune, nor no
    more truth in thee than in a drawn fox; and for woman-hood, Maid
    Marian may be the deputy's wife of the ward to thee. Go, you
    otherwise.
  Fal. Why, she's neither fish nor flesh; a man knows not where to
  Prince. Thou say'st true, hostess, and he slanders thee most
  Host. So he doth you, my lord, and said this other day you ought
    thou art Prince, I fear thee as I fear the roaring of the lion's
  Prince. And why not as the lion?
  Fal. The King himself is to be feared as the lion. Dost thou think
    I'll fear thee as I fear thy father? Nay, an I do, I pray God my
    But, sirrah, there's no room for faith, truth, nor honesty in
    whoreson, impudent, emboss'd rascal, if there were anything in
    and one poor pennyworth of sugar candy to make thee long-winded-
    if thy pocket were enrich'd with any other injuries but these, I
  Fal. Dost thou hear, Hal? Thou knowest in the state of innocency
    Adam fell; and what should poor Jack Falstaff do in the days of
    villany? Thou seest I have more flesh than another man, and
    therefore more frailty. You confess then, you pick'd my pocket?
  Prince. It appears so by the story.
  Fal. Hostess, I forgive thee. Go make ready breakfast. Love thy
    -Still?- Nay, prithee be gone. [Exit Hostess.] Now, Hal, to the
    news at court. For the robbery, lad- how is that answered?
  Prince. O my sweet beef, I must still be good angel to thee.
  Prince. I am good friends with my father, and may do anything.
  Fal. Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou doest, and do it
  Prince. I have procured thee, Jack, a charge of foot.
    steal well? O for a fine thief of the age of two-and-twenty or
    thereabouts! I am heinously unprovided. Well, God be thanked for
    these rebels. They offend none but the virtuous. I laud them, I
    praise them.
    To my brother John; this to my Lord of Westmoreland.
    Jack, meet me to-morrow in the Temple Hall
    At two o'clock in the afternoon.
    There shalt thou know thy charge. and there receive
    Money and order for their furniture.
    And either they or we must lower lie.                [Exit.]
    Such attribution should the Douglas have
    Should go so general current through the world.
    The tongues of soothers! but a braver place
  Doug. Thou art the king of honour.
    No man so potent breathes upon the ground
    What letters hast thou there?- I can but thank you.
  Messenger. These letters come from your father.
  Hot. Zounds! how has he the leisure to be sick
    Under whose government come they along?
  Wor. I prithee tell me, doth he keep his bed?
    And at the time of my departure thence
  Wor. I would the state of time had first been whole
    'Tis catching hither, even to our camp.
    For, as he writes, there is no quailing now,
    Because the King is certainly possess'd
  Wor. Your father's sickness is a maim to us.
    To set the exact wealth of all our states
    On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?
    It were not good; for therein should we read
    The very bottom and the soul of hope,
    The very list, the very utmost bound
    We may boldly spend upon the hope of what
    If that the devil and mischance look big
    Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.
  Wor. But yet I would your father had been here.
    Of our proceedings kept the Earl from hence.
    May turn the tide of fearful faction
    For well you know we of the off'ring side
    This absence of your father's draws a curtain
    That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
    I rather of his absence make this use:
    Than if the Earl were here; for men must think,
    Is marching hitherwards; with him Prince John.
  Ver. And further, I have learn'd
    Or hitherwards intended speedily,
    And his comrades, that daff'd the world aside
    All plum'd like estridges that with the wind
    As full of spirit as the month of May
    And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer;
    Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury,
    As if an angel dropp'd down from the clouds
    And witch the world with noble horsemanship.
  Hot. No more, no more! Worse than the sun in March,
    This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come.
    They come like sacrifices in their trim,
    And to the fire-ey'd maid of smoky war
    All hot and bleeding Will we offer them.
    Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire
    Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales.
  Doug. That's the worst tidings that I hear of yet.
  Hot. What may the King's whole battle reach unto?
    My father and Glendower being both away,
  Fal. Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry; fill me a bottle of
    take them all; I'll answer the coinage. Bid my lieutenant Peto
    have misused the King's press damnably. I have got in exchange of
    out contracted bachelors, such as had been ask'd twice on the
    banes- such a commodity of warm slaves as had as lieve hear the
    devil as a drum; such as fear the report of a caliver worse than
    toasts-and-butter, with hearts in their bellies no bigger than
    pins' heads, and they have bought out their services; and now my
    gentlemen of companies- slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the
    painted cloth, where the glutton's dogs licked his sores; and
    serving-men, younger sons to Younger brothers, revolted tapsters,
    and ostlers trade-fall'n; the cankers of a calm world and a long
    ancient; and such have I to fill up the rooms of them that have
    bought out their services that you would think that I had a
    on the way, and told me I had unloaded all the gibbets and
    press'd the dead bodies. No eye hath seen such scarecrows. I'll
    not march through Coventry with them, that's flat. Nay, and the
    villains march wide betwixt the legs, as if they had gyves on;
    for indeed I had the most of them out of prison. There's but a
    shirt and a half in all my company; and the half-shirt is two
    napkins tack'd together and thrown over the shoulders like a
    herald's coat without sleeves; and the shirt, to say the truth,
    stol'n from my host at Saint Alban's, or the red-nose innkeeper
    of Daventry. But that's all one; they'll find linen enough on
              Enter the Prince and the Lord of Westmoreland.
  West. Faith, Sir John, 'tis more than time that I were there, and
    you too; but my powers are there already. The King, I can tell
  Prince. I think, to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath already
    made thee butter. But tell me, Jack, whose fellows are these that
  West. Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poor and bare-
  Fal. Faith, for their poverty, I know, not where they had that; and
    for their bareness, I am surd they never learn'd that of me.
  Prince. No, I'll be sworn, unless you call three fingers on the
    ribs bare. But, sirrah, make haste. Percy 's already in the
  Fal. What, is the King encamp'd?
    To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast
  Doug. You give him then advantage.
    Let it be seen to-morrow in the battle
    And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
    That not a horse is half the half of himself.
  Hot. So are the horses of the enemy,
  Wor. The number of the King exceedeth ours.
  Blunt. I come with gracious offers from the King,
    You conjure from the breast of civil peace
    Audacious cruelty. If that the King
    And pardon absolute for yourself and these
  Hot. The King is kind; and well we know the King
    My father and my uncle and myself
    Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,
    My father gave him welcome to the shore;
    My father, in kind heart and pity mov'd,
    Now, when the lords and barons of the realm
    Laid gifts before him, proffer'd him their oaths,
    Give him their heirs as pages, followed him
    Even at the heels in golden multitudes.
    Made to my father, while his blood was poor,
    Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh;
    That lie too heavy on the commonwealth;
    Proceeded further- cut me off the heads
    Of all the favourites that the absent King
    When he was personal in the Irish war.
  Hot. Then to the point.
    In short time after lie depos'd the King;
    And in the neck of that task'd the whole state;
    Rated mine uncle from the Council board;
    In rage dismiss'd my father from the court;
    Into his title, the which we find
  Blunt. Shall I return this answer to the King?
    Go to the King; and let there be impawn'd
    And In the morning early shall mine uncle
Enter the Archbishop of York and Sir Michael.
    With winged haste to the Lord Marshal;
    This to my cousin Scroop; and all the rest
    To whom they are directed. If you knew
    How much they do import, you would make haste.
    I guess their tenour.
    Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
    Must bide the touch; for, sir, at Shrewsbury,
    What with the sickness of Northumberland,
    Whose power was in the first proportion,
    And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,
    Who with them was a rated sinew too
    I fear the power of Percy is too weak
    To wage an instant trial with the King.
  Arch. No, Mortimer is not there.
  Sir M. But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,
    And there is my Lord of Worcester, and a head
  Arch. And so there is; but yet the King hath drawn
    The special head of all the land together-
  Sir M. Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well oppos'd.
    And, to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed.
    For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the King
    To other friends; and so farewell, Sir Michael.
Enter the King, Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster, Sir Walter Blunt,
  King. How bloodily the sun begins to peer
  Prince. The southern wind
    Doth play the trumpet to his purposes
    And by his hollow whistling in the leaves
  King. Theft with the losers let it sympathize,
    Of broached mischief to the unborn times?
    To entertain the lag-end of my life
    I have not sought the day of this dislike.
  King. You have not sought it! How comes it then,
    We were the first and dearest of your friends.
    To meet you on the way and kiss your hand
    It was myself, my brother, and his son
    The dangers of the time. You swore to us,
    That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state,
    Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right,
    What with our help, what with the absent King,
    What with the injuries of a wanton time,
    And the contrarious winds that held the King
    To gripe the general sway into your hand;
    As that ungentle gull, the cuckoo's bird,
    Useth the sparrow- did oppress our nest;
    To face the garment of rebellion
    With some fine colour that may please the eye
    Which gape and rub the elbow at the news
  Prince. In both our armies there is many a soul
    If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew
    The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world
    Yet this before my father's Majesty-
    I am content that he shall take the odds
    And will to save the blood on either side,
  King. And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
    And, will they take the offer of our grace,
    Both he, and they, and you, yea, every man
    And they shall do their office. So be gone.
    The Douglas and the Hotspur both together
    Are confident against the world in arms.
  King. Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge;
    For, on their answer, will we set on them,
  Fal. Hal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestride me, so!
  Prince. Nothing but a Colossus can do thee that friendship.
    me off when I come on? How then? Can honor set to a leg? No. Or
    an arm? No. Or take away the grief of a wound? No. Honour hath no
    skill in surgery then? No. What is honour? A word. What is that
    insensible then? Yea, to the dead. But will it not live with the
    The liberal and kind offer of the King.
    To punish this offence in other faults.
    For treason is but trusted like the fox
    The better cherish'd, still the nearer death.
    It hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood,
    And on his father's. We did train him on;
    We, as the spring of all, shall pay for all.
    In any case, the offer of the King.
  Doug. Defy him by the Lord Of Westmoreland.
  Wor. There is no seeming mercy in the King.
  Wor. The Prince of Wales stepp'd forth before the King
  Hot. O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
    Unless a brother should a brother dare
    He gave you all the duties of a man;
    As if lie mast'red there a double spirit
    There did he pause; but let me tell the world,
    If he outlive the envy of this day,
    Than I, that have not well the gift of tongue,
  Hot. I cannot read them now.-
    O gentlemen, the time of life is short!
    Still ending at the arrival of an hour.
    Now for our consciences, the arms are fair,
    When the intent of bearing them is just.
                  Enter another Messenger.
    With the best blood that I can meet withal
    In the adventure of this perilous day.
    Sound all the lofty instruments of war,
                          Here they embrace. The trumpets sound.
Plain between the camps.
The King enters with his Power.  Alarum to the battle.  Then enter Douglas
  Blunt. What is thy name, that in the battle thus
  Doug. Know then my name is Douglas,
    And I do haunt thee in the battle thus
  Blunt. They tell thee true.
    Thy likeness; for instead of thee, King Harry,
    This sword hath ended him. So shall it thee,
    Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
  Doug. All's done, all's won. Here breathless lies the King.
    Semblably furnish'd like the King himself.
  Doug. A fool go with thy soul, whither it goes!
    Until I meet the King.
    Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.
  Fal. Though I could scape shot-free at London, I fear the shot
    here. Here's no scoring but upon the pate. Soft! who are you?
    rag-of-muffins where they are pepper'd. There's not three of my
    hundred and fifty left alive; and they are for the town's end, to
                         Enter the Prince.
    Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies,
    Whose deaths are yet unreveng'd. I prithee
  Fal. O Hal, I prithee give me leave to breathe awhile. Turk Gregory
  Prince. He is indeed, and living to kill thee.
    I prithee lend me thy sword.
  Prince. Give it me. What, is it in the case?
                              He throws the bottle at him. Exit.
    unlook'd for, and there's an end.                      Exit.
Another part of the field.
Alarum. Excursions. Enter the King, the Prince, Lord John of Lancaster,
  King. I prithee,
  John. We breathe too long. Come, cousin Westmoreland,
    I did not think thee lord of such a spirit.
    Before, I lov'd thee as a brother, John;
    But now, I do respect thee as my soul.
  King. I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point
  Doug. Another king? They grow like Hydra's heads.
    I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
    That wear those colours on them. What art thou
    That counterfeit'st the person of a king?
    And not the very King. I have two boys
    Seek Percy and thyself about the field;
    I will assay thee. So defend thyself.
  Doug. I fear thou art another counterfeit;
    And yet, in faith, thou bearest thee like a king.
    And thus I win thee.
    It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee,
  King. Stay and breathe awhile.
  Prince. O God! they did me too much injury
    As all the poisonous potions in the world,
    And sav'd the treacherous labour of your son.
  Prince. Why, then I see
    A very valiant rebel of the name.
    I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy,
    Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
    Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
  Hot. Nor shall it, Harry; for the hour is come
    To end the one of us and would to God
  Prince. I'll make it greater ere I part from thee,
    And all the budding honours on thy crest
    I better brook the loss of brittle life
    But thoughts the slave, of life, and life time's fool,
    And time, that takes survey of all the world,
    But that the earthy and cold hand of death
  Prince. For worms, brave Percy. Fare thee well, great heart!
    But now two paces of the vilest earth
    Is room enough. This earth that bears thee dead
    For doing these fair rites of tenderness.
    Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven!
    Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
                               He spieth Falstaff on the ground.
    O, I should have a heavy miss of thee
    Embowell'd will I see thee by-and-by;
    Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.                 Exit.
    counterfeit; for he is but the counterfeit of a man who hath not
    the life of a man; but to counterfeit dying when a man thereby
    liveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true and perfect image
    of life indeed. The better part of valour is discretion; in the
    prove the better counterfeit. Therefore I'll make him sure; yea,
  Prince. Come, brother John; full bravely hast thou flesh'd
    Breathless and bleeding on the ground. Art thou alive,
    I prithee speak. We will not trust our eyes
    Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack. There 's Percy. If your father
    will do me any honour, so; if not, let him kill the next Percy
    himself. I look to be either earl or duke, I can assure you.
  Prince. Why, Percy I kill'd myself, and saw thee dead!
    clock. If I may be believ'd, so; if not, let them that should
    reward valour bear the sin upon their own heads. I'll take it
    upon my death, I gave him this wound in the thigh. If the man
  John. This is the strangest tale that ever I beard.
  Prince. This is the strangest fellow, brother John.
    For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
    I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.
    The trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours.
    Come, brother, let's to the highest of the field,
  Fal. I'll follow, as they say, for reward. He that rewards me, God
                                    Exit [bearing off the body].
Another part of the field.
The trumpets sound. [Enter the King, Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
    Misuse the tenour of thy kinsman's trust?
  King. Bear Worcester to the death, and Vernon too;
    Other offenders we will pause upon.
    How goes the field?
    The fortune of the day quite turn'd from him,
    Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest;
    That the pursuers took him. At my tent
  Prince. Then brother John of Lancaster, to you
    Go to the Douglas and deliver him
    Even in the bosom of our adversaries.
    To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
    To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
    Meeting the check of such another day;
  RUMOUR, the Presenter
    Of the King's party
  HOSTESS QUICKLY, of the Boar's Head, Eastcheap
    Speaker of the Epilogue
    I, from the orient to the drooping west,
    Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold
    Stuffing the ears of men with false reports.
    Under the smile of safety, wounds the world;
    Whiles the big year, swoln with some other grief,
    Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war,
    That the blunt monster with uncounted heads,
    Quenching the flame of bold rebellion
    Even with the rebels' blood. But what mean I
    Under the wrath of noble Hotspur's sword,
    And that the King before the Douglas' rage
    This have I rumour'd through the peasant towns
    Where Hotspur's father, old Northumberland,
    And not a man of them brings other news
    Than they have learnt of me. From Rumour's tongues
  LORD BARDOLPH. Who keeps the gate here, ho?
                   The PORTER opens the gate
    Where is the Earl?
  LORD BARDOLPH. Tell thou the Earl
    That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here.
  PORTER. His lordship is walk'd forth into the orchard.
    Please it your honour knock but at the gate,
  LORD BARDOLPH. Here comes the Earl.                Exit PORTER
    Should be the father of some stratagem.
    The King is almost wounded to the death;
    And, in the fortune of my lord your son,
    Prince Harry slain outright; and both the Blunts
    Kill'd by the hand of Douglas; young Prince John,
    And Westmoreland, and Stafford, fled the field;
    And Harry Monmouth's brawn, the hulk Sir John,
    Came not till now to dignify the times,
    Saw you the field? Came you from Shrewsbury?
  LORD BARDOLPH. I spake with one, my lord, that came from thence;
    That freely rend'red me these news for true.
  LORD BARDOLPH. My lord, I over-rode him on the way;
    That stopp'd by me to breathe his bloodied horse.
    He ask'd the way to Chester; and of him
    With that he gave his able horse the head
    Against the panting sides of his poor jade
    Up to the rowel-head; and starting so,
    He seem'd in running to devour the way,
    If my young lord your son have not the day,
    Give then such instances of loss?
    Foretells the nature of a tragic volume.
    So looks the strand whereon the imperious flood
  NORTHUMBERLAND. How doth my son and brother?
    Thou tremblest; and the whiteness in thy cheek
    Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night
    But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue,
    Your brother thus; so fought the noble Douglas'-
    Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds;
    But in the end, to stop my ear indeed,
    Ending with 'Brother, son, and all, are dead.'
  MORTON. Douglas is living, and your brother, yet;
    He that but fears the thing he would not know
    Hath by instinct knowledge from others' eyes
    And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.
    And he doth sin that doth belie the dead,
    Not he which says the dead is not alive.
    Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news
    But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state,
    The never-daunted Percy to the earth,
    Even to the dullest peasant in his camp-
    From the best-temper'd courage in his troops;
    Which once in him abated, an the rest
    Turn'd on themselves, like dull and heavy lead.
    And as the thing that's heavy in itself
    Lend to this weight such lightness with their fear
    That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim
    Than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety,
    Fly from the field. Then was that noble Worcester
    Had three times slain th' appearance of the King,
    Gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame
    Of those that turn'd their backs, and in his flight,
    Is that the King hath won, and hath sent out
    Under the conduct of young Lancaster
    And Westmoreland. This is the news at full.
    In poison there is physic; and these news,
    And as the wretch whose fever-weak'ned joints,
    Are thrice themselves. Hence, therefore, thou nice crutch!
    Thou art a guard too wanton for the head
    Keep the wild flood confin'd! Let order die!
    But let one spirit of the first-born Cain
    On bloody courses, the rude scene may end
    And darkness be the burier of the dead!
    Lean on your health; the which, if you give o'er
    And summ'd the account of chance before you said
    That in the dole of blows your son might drop.
    The stiff-borne action. What hath then befall'n,
    And yet we ventur'd, for the gain propos'd
    Chok'd the respect of likely peril fear'd;
    I hear for certain, and dare speak the truth:
    My lord your son had only but the corpse,
    But shadows and the shows of men, to fight;
    The action of their bodies from their souls;
    And they did fight with queasiness, constrain'd,
    As men drink potions; that their weapons only
    Seem'd on our side, but for their spirits and souls
    This word 'rebellion'- it had froze them up,
    As fish are in a pond. But now the Bishop
    And doth enlarge his rising with the blood
    Tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land,
  FALSTAFF. Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?
  PAGE. He said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy water; but
    for the party that owed it, he might have moe diseases than he
    me. I am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in
    other men. I do here walk before thee like a sow that hath
    overwhelm'd all her litter but one. If the Prince put thee into
    my service for any other reason than to set me off, why then I
    an agate till now; but I will inset you neither in gold nor
    master, for a jewel- the juvenal, the Prince your master, whose
    chin is not yet fledge. I will sooner have a beard grow in the
    father was a bachelor. He may keep his own grace, but he's almost
    the satin for my short cloak and my slops?
    Bardolph. He would not take his band and yours; he liked not the
  FALSTAFF. Let him be damn'd, like the Glutton; pray God his tongue
    bear a gentleman in hand, and then stand upon security! The
    bunches of keys at their girdles; and if a man is through with
    them in honest taking-up, then they must stand upon security. I
    had as lief they would put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop
    Well, he may sleep in security; for he hath the horn of
    abundance, and the lightness of his wife shines through it; and
    Smithfield. An I could get me but a wife in the stews, I were
              Enter the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE and SERVANT
  PAGE. Sir, here comes the nobleman that committed the
  CHIEF JUSTICE. What's he that goes there?
  CHIEF JUSTICE. He that was in question for the robb'ry?
    Shrewsbury, and, as I hear, is now going with some charge to the
  CHIEF JUSTICE. I am sure he is, to the hearing of anything good.
    Go, pluck him by the elbow; I must speak with him.
  FALSTAFF. What! a young knave, and begging! Is there not wars? Is
    there not employment? Doth not the King lack subjects? Do not the
    one, it is worse shame to beg than to be on the worst side, were
    it worse than the name of rebellion can tell how to make it.
  SERVANT. I pray you, sir, then set your knighthood and your
    throat, if you say I am any other than an honest man.
  FALSTAFF. I give thee leave to tell me so! I lay aside that which
    of age in you, some relish of the saltness of time; and I most
    please your lordship, a kind of sleeping in the blood, a whoreson
    perturbation of the brain. I have read the cause of his effects
  CHIEF JUSTICE. I think you are fall'n into the disease, for you
  FALSTAFF. Very well, my lord, very well. Rather an't please you, it
    is the disease of not listening, the malady of not marking, that
  CHIEF JUSTICE. To punish you by the heels would amend the attention
    lordship may minister the potion of imprisonment to me in respect
    prescriptions, the wise may make some dram of a scruple, or
  CHIEF JUSTICE. I sent for you, when there were matters against you
  FALSTAFF. As I was then advis'd by my learned counsel in the laws
  CHIEF JUSTICE. Well, the truth is, Sir John, you live in great
  FALSTAFF. I would it were otherwise; I would my means were greater
  CHIEF JUSTICE. You have misled the youthful Prince.
  FALSTAFF. The young Prince hath misled me. I am the fellow with the
  CHIEF JUSTICE. What! you are as a candle, the better part burnt
    wax, my growth would approve the truth.
  CHIEF JUSTICE. You follow the young Prince up and down, like his
    little regard in these costermongers' times that true valour is
    wasted in giving reckonings; all the other gifts appertinent to
    man, as the malice of this age shapes them, are not worth a
    gooseberry. You that are old consider not the capacities of us
    that are young; you do measure the heat of our livers with the
    bitterness of your galls; and we that are in the vaward of our
  CHIEF JUSTICE. Do you set down your name in the scroll of youth,
    that are written down old with all the characters of age? Have
  FALSTAFF. My lord, I was born about three of the clock in the
    voice- I have lost it with hallooing and singing of anthems. To
    approve my youth further, I will not. The truth is, I am only old
    a thousand marks, let him lend me the money, and have at him. For
    the box of the ear that the Prince gave you- he gave it like a
    him for it; and the young lion repents- marry, not in ashes and
  CHIEF JUSTICE. Well, God send the Prince a better companion!
  FALSTAFF. God send the companion a better prince! I cannot rid my
  CHIEF JUSTICE. Well, the King hath sever'd you. I hear you are
    going with Lord John of Lancaster against the Archbishop and the
    join not in a hot day; for, by the Lord, I take but two shirts
    but it was alway yet the trick of our English nation, if they
    were not so terrible to the enemy as it is. I were better to be
    and lechery; but the gout galls the one, and the pox pinches the
    other; and so both the degrees prevent my curses. Boy!
  FALSTAFF. I can get no remedy against this consumption of the
    purse; borrowing only lingers and lingers it out, but the disease
    to the Prince; this to the Earl of Westmoreland; and this to old
    perceiv'd the first white hair of my chin. About it; you know
    this pox! for the one or the other plays the rogue with my great
    toe. 'Tis no matter if I do halt; I have the wars for my colour,
    and my pension shall seem the more reasonable. A good wit will
Enter the ARCHBISHOP, THOMAS MOWBRAY the EARL MARSHAL, LORD HASTINGS,
  MOWBRAY. I well allow the occasion of our amis;
    Upon the power and puissance of the King.
  HASTINGS. Our present musters grow upon the file
    And our supplies live largely in the hope
  LORD BARDOLPH. The question then, Lord Hastings, standeth thus:
    Whether our present five and twenty thousand
  LORD BARDOLPH. Yea, marry, there's the point;
    Till we had his assistance by the hand;
    For, in a theme so bloody-fac'd as this,
    Eating the air and promise of supply,
    Much smaller than the smallest of his thoughts;
    Indeed the instant action, a cause on foot-
    That frosts will bite them. When we mean to build,
    We first survey the plot, then draw the model;
    And when we see the figure of the house,
    Then we must rate the cost of the erection;
    What do we then but draw anew the model
    And set another up- should we survey
    The plot of situation and the model,
    Using the names of men instead of men;
    Like one that draws the model of a house
    A naked subject to the weeping clouds
    Even as we are, to equal with the King.
  LORD BARDOLPH. What, is the King but five and twenty thousand?
    For his divisions, as the times do brawl,
    Are in three heads: one power against the French,
    Must take up us. So is the unfirm King
  ARCHBISHOP. That he should draw his several strengths together
    He leaves his back unarm'd, the French and Welsh
  LORD BARDOLPH. Who is it like should lead his forces hither?
    Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth;
    But who is substituted against the French
    And publish the occasion of our arms.
    The commonwealth is sick of their own choice;
    Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.
    Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard;
    And howl'st to find it. What trust is in these times?
  HOSTESS. Master Fang, have you ent'red the action?
  HOSTESS. Alas the day! take heed of him; he stabb'd me in mine own
    devil; he will spare neither man, woman, nor child.
  HOSTESS. No, nor I neither; I'll be at your elbow.
    indited to dinner to the Lubber's Head in Lumbert Street, to
    Master Smooth's the silkman. I pray you, since my exion is
    ent'red, and my case so openly known to the world, let him be
  FALSTAFF. How now! whose mare's dead? What's the matter?
  FANG. Sir John, I arrest you at the suit of Mistress Quickly.
  FALSTAFF. Away, varlets! Draw, Bardolph. Cut me off the villian's
    head. Throw the quean in the channel.
  HOSTESS. Throw me in the channel! I'll throw thee in the channel.
    thou honeysuckle villain! wilt thou kill God's officers and the
  FALSTAFF. Keep them off, Bardolph.
              Enter the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE and his men
  CHIEF JUSTICE. What is the matter? Keep the peace here, ho!
    out again, or I will ride thee a nights like a mare.
  FALSTAFF. I think I am as like to ride the mare, if I have any
  FALSTAFF. What is the gross sum that I owe thee?
  HOSTESS. Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the money
    my Dolphin chamber, at the round table, by a sea-coal fire, upon
    Wednesday in Wheeson week, when the Prince broke thy head for
    liking his father to singing-man of Windsor- thou didst swear to
    me then, as I was washing thy wound, to marry me and make me my
    lady thy wife. Canst thou deny it? Did not goodwife Keech, the
    butcher's wife, come in then and call me gossip Quickly? Coming
    thee they were ill for green wound? And didst thou not, when she
    such poor people, saying that ere long they should call me madam?
    And didst thou not kiss me, and bid me fetch the thirty
    shillings? I put thee now to thy book-oath. Deny it, if thou
    down the town that her eldest son is like you. She hath been in
    good case, and, the truth is, poverty hath distracted her. But
    for these foolish officers, I beseech you I may have redress
    against them.
    manner of wrenching the true cause the false way. It is not a
    confident brow, nor the throng of words that come with such more
    consideration. You have, as it appears to me, practis'd upon the
  CHIEF JUSTICE. Pray thee, peace. Pay her the debt you owe her, and
    unpay the villainy you have done with her; the one you may do
    with sterling money, and the other with current repentance.
    desire deliverance from these officers, being upon hasty
    employment in the King's affairs.
    th' effect of your reputation, and satisfy the poor woman.
  FALSTAFF. Come hither, hostess.
    Are near at hand. The rest the paper tells. [Gives a letter]
    both my plate and the tapestry of my dining-chambers.
  FALSTAFF. Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking; and for thy
    walls, a pretty slight drollery, or the story of the Prodigal, or
    the German hunting, in water-work, is worth a thousand of these
    bed-hangers and these fly-bitten tapestries. Let it be ten pound,
    if thou canst. Come, and 'twere not for thy humours, there's not
    a better wench in England. Go, wash thy face, and draw the
  HOSTESS. Pray thee, Sir John, let it be but twenty nobles;
  FALSTAFF. Let it alone; I'll make other shift. You'll be a fool
    I hope you'll come to supper. you'll pay me all together?
  FALSTAFF. What's the news, my lord?
  CHIEF JUSTICE. Where lay the King to-night?
  FALSTAFF. I hope, my lord, all's well. What is the news, my lord?
    Against Northumberland and the Archbishop.
  FALSTAFF. Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?
  CHIEF JUSTICE. What's the matter?
  CHIEF JUSTICE. What foolish master taught you these manners, Sir
  FALSTAFF. Master Gower, if they become me not, he was a fool that
    taught them me. This is the right fencing grace, my lord; tap for
  CHIEF JUSTICE. Now, the Lord lighten thee! Thou art a great fool.
London. Another street
  PRINCE. Faith, it does me; though it discolours the complexion of
  PRINCE. Belike then my appetite was not-princely got; for, by my
    troth, I do now remember the poor creature, small beer. But
    indeed these humble considerations make me out of love with my
    stockings thou hast- viz., these, and those that were thy
    peach-colour'd ones- or to bear the inventory of thy shirts- as,
    one for superfluity, and another for use! But that the
    linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there; as thou hast
    not done a great while, because the rest of thy low countries
    have made a shift to eat up thy holland. And God knows whether
    those that bawl out of the ruins of thy linen shall inherit his
    kingdom; but the midwives say the children are not in the fault;
    whereupon the world increases, and kindreds are mightily
    strengthened.
    do so, their fathers being so sick as yours at this time is?
  PRINCE. Shall I tell thee one thing, Poins?
  POINS. Go to; I stand the push of your one thing that you will
  PRINCE. Marry, I tell thee it is not meet that I should be sad, now
    my father is sick; albeit I could tell to thee- as to one it
  PRINCE. By this hand, thou thinkest me as far in the devil's book
    as thou and Falstaff for obduracy and persistency: let the end
    try the man. But I tell thee my heart bleeds inwardly that my
    father is so sick; and keeping such vile company as thou art hath
  POINS. I would think thee a most princely hypocrite.
    fellow to think as every man thinks. Never a man's thought in the
    world keeps the road-way better than thine. Every man would think
  PRINCE. And to thee.
    own ears. The worst that they can say of me is that I am a second
    brother and that I am a proper fellow of my hands; and those two
    things, I confess, I cannot help. By the mass, here comes
  PRINCE. And the boy that I gave Falstaff. 'A had him from me
    Christian; and look if the fat villain have not transform'd him
    could discern no part of his face from the window. At last I
    spied his eyes; and methought he had made two holes in the
  PRINCE. Has not the boy profited?
    firebrand; and therefore I call him her dream.
    Well, there is sixpence to preserve thee.
  BARDOLPH. An you do not make him be hang'd among you, the gallows
  POINS. Deliver'd with good respect. And how doth the martlemas,
  POINS. Marry, the immortal part needs a physician; but that moves
    are kin to the King; for they never prick their finger but they
    say 'There's some of the King's blood spilt.' 'How comes that?'
    ready as a borrower's cap: 'I am the King's poor cousin, sir.'
  PRINCE. Nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it from
    Japhet. But the letter:  [Reads]  'Sir John Falstaff, knight, to
    the son of the King nearest his father, Harry Prince of Wales,
  PRINCE. Peace!  [Reads]  'I will imitate the honourable Romans in
  PRINCE.  [Reads]  'I commend me to thee, I commend thee, and I
    leave thee. Be not too familiar with Poins; for he misuses thy
        JOHN with my brothers and sisters, and SIR JOHN with
  POINS. God send the wench no worse fortune! But I never said so.
  PRINCE. Well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the spirits
    of the wise sit in the clouds and mock us. Is your master here in
  PRINCE. Where sups he? Doth the old boar feed in the old frank?
  BARDOLPH. At the old place, my lord, in Eastcheap.
  PAGE. Ephesians, my lord, of the old church.
  PRINCE. Even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town bull.
    Shall we steal upon them, Ned, at supper?
  POINS. I warrant you, as common as the way between Saint Albans and
  POINS. Put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait upon him at
    shall be mine; for in everything the purpose must weigh with the
Warkworth. Before the castle
  NORTHUMBERLAND. I pray thee, loving wife, and gentle daughter,
    Put not you on the visage of the times
    And be, like them, to Percy troublesome.
  LADY PERCY. O, yet, for God's sake, go not to these wars!
    The time was, father, that you broke your word,
    Threw many a northward look to see his father
    Who then persuaded you to stay at home?
    For yours, the God of heaven brighten it!
    For his, it stuck upon him as the sun
    In the grey vault of heaven; and by his light
    Did all the chivalry of England move
    To do brave acts. He was indeed the glass
    Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves.
    Became the accents of the valiant;
    Would turn their own perfection to abuse
    He was the mark and glass, copy and book,
    That fashion'd others. And him- O wondrous him!
    To look upon the hideous god of war
    Where nothing but the sound of Hotspur's name
    Never, O never, do his ghost the wrong
    With others than with him! Let them alone.
    The Marshal and the Archbishop are strong.
    Had my sweet Harry had but half their numbers,
    But I must go and meet with danger there,
    Or it will seek me in another place,
    Till that the nobles and the armed commons
    Have of their puissance made a little taste.
  LADY PERCY. If they get ground and vantage of the King,
    Then join you with them, like a rib of steel,
    First let them try themselves. So did your son;
    As with the tide swell'd up unto his height,
    That makes a still-stand, running neither way.
    Fain would I go to meet the Archbishop,
Enter FRANCIS and another DRAWER
  FRANCIS. What the devil hast thou brought there-apple-johns? Thou
    of apple-johns before him, and told him there were five more Sir
    of these six dry, round, old, withered knights.' It ang'red him
    to the heart; but he hath forgot that.
  FRANCIS. Why, then, cover and set them down; and see if thou canst
  THIRD DRAWER. Dispatch! The room where they supp'd is too hot;
    they'll come in straight.
  FRANCIS. Sirrah, here will be the Prince and Master Poins anon; and
    they will put on two of our jerkins and aprons; and Sir John must
  THIRD DRAWER. By the mass, here will be old uds; it will be an
  HOSTESS. I' faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in an excellent
    the blood ere one can say 'What's this?' How do you now?
  FALSTAFF.  [Singing]  'When Arthur first in court'- Empty the
  FALSTAFF. So is all her sect; and they be once in a calm, they are
  DOLL. A pox damn you, you muddy rascal! Is that all the comfort you
  DOLL. I make them! Gluttony and diseases make them: I make them
  FALSTAFF. If the cook help to make the gluttony, you help to make
    the diseases, Doll. We catch of you, Doll, we catch of you; grant
    is to come halting off; you know, to come off the breach with his
    pike bent bravely, and to surgery bravely; to venture upon the
  HOSTESS. By my troth, this is the old fashion; you two never meet
    rheumatic as two dry toasts; you cannot one bear with another's
    confirmities. What the good-year! one must bear, and that must be
    you. You are the weaker vessel, as as they say, the emptier
    have not seen a hulk better stuff'd in the hold. Come, I'll be
    friends with thee, Jack. Thou art going to the wars; and whether
    I shall ever see thee again or no, there is nobody cares.
  DOLL. Hang him, swaggering rascal! Let him not come hither; it is
    the foul-mouth'dst rogue in England.
    name and fame with the very best. Shut the door. There comes no
    swaggering now. Shut the door, I pray you.
  HOSTESS. Pray ye, pacify yourself, Sir John; there comes no
    swagg'rer comes not in my doors. I was before Master Tisick, the
    debuty, t' other day; and, as he said to me- 'twas no longer ago
    he- Master Dumbe, our minister, was by then- 'Neighbour Quickly,'
    'you are an honest woman and well thought on, therefore take heed
    with a Barbary hen, if her feathers turn back in any show of
    the worse when one says 'swagger.' Feel, masters, how I shake;
    wine, I'll thrust my knife in your mouldy chaps, an you play the
    to be called captain? An captains were of my mind, they would
    truncheon you out, for taking their names upon you before you
    have earn'd them. You a captain! you slave, for what? For tearing
    captain! God's light, these villains will make the word as odious
    as the word 'occupy'; which was an excellent good word before it
  BARDOLPH. Pray thee go down, good ancient.
  FALSTAFF. Hark thee hither, Mistress Doll.
  PISTOL. Not I! I tell thee what, Corporal Bardolph, I could tear
  PAGE. Pray thee go down.
    And Troiant Greeks? Nay, rather damn them with
    King Cerberus; and let the welkin roar.
  HOSTESS. By my troth, Captain, these are very bitter words.
  HOSTESS. O' my word, Captain, there's none such here. What the
    Fear we broadsides? No, let the fiend give fire.
    Give me some sack; and, sweetheart, lie thou there.
  PISTOL. Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf. What! we have seen the seven
    Why, then, let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds
    Untwine the Sisters Three! Come, Atropos, I say!
  DOLL. I pray thee, Jack, I pray thee, do not draw.
    I'll be in these tirrits and frights. So; murder, I warrant now.
  DOLL. I pray thee, Jack, be quiet; the rascal's gone. Ah, you
    chops. Ah, rogue! i' faith, I love thee. Thou art as valorous as
    than the Nine Worthies. Ah, villain!
  FALSTAFF. A rascally slave! I will toss the rogue in a blanket.
    thee between a pair of sheets.
  FALSTAFF. Let them play. Play, sirs. Sit on my knee, Don. A rascal
  DOLL. Sirrah, what humour's the Prince of?
    Tewksbury mustard; there's no more conceit in him than is in a
  DOLL. Why does the Prince love him so, then?
  FALSTAFF. Because their legs are both of a bigness, and 'a plays at
    ends for flap-dragons, and rides the wild mare with the boys, and
    his boots very smooth, like unto the sign of the Leg, and breeds
    no bate with telling of discreet stories; and such other gambol
    faculties 'a has, that show a weak mind and an able body, for the
    which the Prince admits him. For the Prince himself is such
    another; the weight of a hair will turn the scales between their
  PRINCE. Look whe'er the wither'd elder hath not his poll claw'd
  POINS. And look whether the fiery Trigon, his man, be not lisping
  DOLL. By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant heart.
  DOLL. I love thee better than I love e'er a scurvy young boy of
    them all.
  FALSTAFF. Ha! a bastard son of the King's? And art thou not Poins
    his brother?
  PRINCE. Very true, sir, and I come to draw you out by the ears.
  HOSTESS. O, the Lord preserve thy Grace! By my troth, welcome to
    London. Now the Lord bless that sweet face of thine. O Jesu, are
    to a merriment, if you take not the heat.
  PRINCE. I shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse, and
    then I know how to handle you.
    disprais'd him before the wicked- that the wicked might not fall
    in love with thee; in which doing, I have done the part of a
    careful friend and a true subject; and thy father is to give me
  PRINCE. See now, whether pure fear and entire cowardice doth not
    make thee wrong this virtuous gentlewoman to close with us? Is
    she of the wicked? Is thine hostess here of the wicked? Or is thy
    boy of the wicked? Or honest Bardolph, whose zeal burns in his
    nose, of the wicked?
    roast malt-worms. For the boy- there is a good angel about him;
    but the devil outbids him too.
  PRINCE. For the women?
  FALSTAFF. For one of them- she's in hell already, and burns poor
    souls. For th' other- I owe her money; and whether she be damn'd
    Marry, there is another indictment upon thee for suffering flesh
    to be eaten in thy house, contrary to the law; for the which I
  HOSTESS. Who knocks so loud at door? Look to th' door there,
  PETO. The King your father is at Westminster;
    And there are twenty weak and wearied posts
    Come from the north; and as I came along
    Bare-headed, sweating, knocking at the taverns,
    So idly to profane the precious time,
    When tempest of commotion, like the south,
  FALSTAFF. Now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and we
    knocking at the door!
    How now! What's the matter?
  FALSTAFF.  [To the PAGE]. Pay the musicians, sirrah.- Farewell,
    merit are sought after; the undeserver may sleep, when the man of
  HOSTESS. Well, fare thee well. I have known thee these twenty-nine
    -well fare thee well.
  HOSTESS. What's the matter?
Enter the KING in his nightgown, with a page
  KING. Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick;
    But, ere they come, bid them o'er-read these letters
    And well consider of them. Make good speed.        Exit page
    Nature's soft nurse, how have I frightened thee,
    Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs,
    Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
    Than in the perfum'd chambers of the great,
    Under the canopies of costly state,
    O thou dull god, why liest thou with the vile
    In loathsome beds, and leav'st the kingly couch
    Wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast
    Seal up the ship-boy's eyes, and rock his brains
    In cradle of the rude imperious surge,
    And in the visitation of the winds,
    Who take the ruffian billows by the top,
    Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them
    With deafing clamour in the slippery clouds,
    That with the hurly death itself awakes?
    To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude;
    And in the calmest and most stillest night,
    Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.
  KING. Why then, good morrow to you all, my lords.
    Have you read o'er the letters that I sent you?
  KING. Then you perceive the body of our kingdom
    And with what danger, near the heart of it.
  KING. O God! that one might read the book of fate,
    And see the revolution of the times
    Make mountains level, and the continent,
    Into the sea; and other times to see
    The beachy girdle of the ocean
    And changes fill the cup of alteration
    Would shut the book and sit him down and die.
    Did feast together, and in two years after
    Were they at wars. It is but eight years since
    This Percy was the man nearest my soul;
    Who like a brother toil'd in my affairs
    Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard
    Did speak these words, now prov'd a prophecy?
    'Northumberland, thou ladder by the which
    Though then, God knows, I had no such intent
    But that necessity so bow'd the state
    'The time will come that foul sin, gathering head,
    And the division of our amity.
    Figuring the natures of the times deceas'd;
    With a near aim, of the main chance of things
    As yet not come to life, who in their seeds
    Such things become the hatch and brood of time;
    And, by the necessary form of this,
    That great Northumberland, then false to him,
  KING. Are these things then necessities?
    Then let us meet them like necessities;
    They say the Bishop and Northumberland
    Rumour doth double, like the voice and echo,
    The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace
    To comfort you the more, I have receiv'd
    And these unseasoned hours perforce must ad
    And, were these inward wars once out of hand,
    We would, dear lords, unto the Holy Land.            Exeunt
    your hand, sir. An early stirrer, by the rood! And how doth my
  SHALLOW. 'A must, then, to the Inns o' Court shortly. I was once of
    Clement's Inn; where I think they will talk of mad Shallow yet.
  SILENCE. You were call'd 'lusty Shallow' then, cousin.
  SHALLOW. By the mass, I was call'd anything; and I would have done
    swinge-bucklers in all the Inns of Court again. And I may say to
    you we knew where the bona-robas were, and had the best of them
  SILENCE. This Sir John, cousin, that comes hither anon about
  SHALLOW. The same Sir John, the very same. I see him break
    Scoggin's head at the court gate, when 'a was a crack not thus
    high; and the very same day did I fight with one Sampson
    Stockfish, a fruiterer, behind Gray's Inn. Jesu, Jesu, the mad
  SHALLOW. Certain, 'tis certain; very sure, very sure. Death, as the
  SILENCE. By my troth, I was not there.
  SILENCE. Thereafter as they be- a score of good ewes may be worth
    and one of the King's justices of the peace. What is your good
    How doth the good knight? May I ask how my lady his wife doth?
  BARDOLPH. Pardon, sir; I have heard the word. 'Phrase' call you it?
    By this day, I know not the phrase; but I will maintain the word
    they say, accommodated; or, when a man is being-whereby 'a may be
  FALSTAFF. Good Master Silence, it well befits you should be of the
  FALSTAFF. Fie! this is hot weather. Gentlemen, have you provided me
  FALSTAFF. Let me see them, I beseech you.
  SHALLOW. Where's the roll? Where's the roll? Where's the roll? Let
    marry, sir. Rafe Mouldy! Let them appear as I call; let them do
    so, let them do so. Let me see; where is Mouldy?
  FALSTAFF. 'Tis the more time thou wert us'd.
    and her drudgery. You need not to have prick'd me; there are
    other men fitter to go out than I.
    For th' other, Sir John- let me see. Simon Shadow!
  SHADOW. My mother's son, sir.
  FALSTAFF. Thy mother's son! Like enough; and thy father's shadow.
    So the son of the female is the shadow of the male. It is often
    so indeed; but much of the father's substance!
    number of shadows fill up the muster-book.
    back, and the whole frame stands upon pins. Prick him no more.
    Feeble! Thou wilt be as valiant as the wrathful dove or most
    magnanimous mouse. Prick the woman's tailor- well, Master
    soldier, that is the leader of so many thousands. Let that
  FALSTAFF. I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble. Who is next?
    ringing in the King's affairs upon his coronation day, sir.
  FALSTAFF. Come, thou shalt go to the wars in a gown. We will have
    ring for thee. Is here all?
  SHALLOW. O, Sir John, do you remember since we lay all night in the
  SHALLOW. By the mass, I could anger her to th' heart. She was then
  FALSTAFF. We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master Shallow.
    dinner; come, let's to dinner. Jesus, the days that we have seen!
                                Exeunt FALSTAFF and the JUSTICES
    mine own part, sir, I do not care; but rather because I am
    it go which way it will, he that dies this year is quit for the
                    Re-enter FALSTAFF and the JUSTICES
  SHALLOW. Marry, then- Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble, and Shadow.
    likeliest men, and I would have you serv'd with the best.
    Care I for the limb, the thews, the stature, bulk, and big
    assemblance of a man! Give me the spirit, Master Shallow. Here's
    and discharge you with the motion of a pewterer's hammer, come
    off and on swifter than he that gibbets on the brewer's bucket.
    presents no mark to the enemy; the foeman may with as great aim
    level at the edge of a penknife. And, for a retreat- how swiftly
    will this Feeble, the woman's tailor, run off! O, give me the
    spare men, and spare me the great ones. Put me a caliver into
    Hold, there's a tester for thee.
    then Sir Dagonet in Arthur's show- there was a little quiver
    Bardolph, give the soldiers coats.
  SHALLOW. Sir John, the Lord bless you; God prosper your affairs;
    acquaintance be renewed. Peradventure I will with ye to the
    Bardolph; lead the men away.  [Exeunt all but FALSTAFF]  As I
    return, I will fetch off these justices. I do see the bottom of
    prate to me of the wildness of his youth and the feats he hath
    to the hearer than the Turk's tribute. I do remember him at
    When 'a was naked, he was for all the world like a fork'd radish,
    was the very genius of famine; yet lecherous as a monkey, and the
    whores call'd him mandrake. 'A came ever in the rearward of the
    fashion, and sung those tunes to the overscutch'd huswifes that
    he heard the carmen whistle, and sware they were his fancies or
    brother to him; and I'll be sworn 'a ne'er saw him but once in
    the Tiltyard; and then he burst his head for crowding among the
    eel-skin; the case of a treble hautboy was a mansion for him, a
    philosopher's two stones to me. If the young dace be a bait for
    the old pike, I see no reason in the law of nature but I may snap
    at him. Let time shape, and there an end.               Exit
Yorkshire. Within the Forest of Gaultree
Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK, MOWBRAY, HASTINGS, and others
    To know the numbers of our enemies.
    My friends and brethren in these great affairs,
    That your attempts may overlive the hazard
    And fearful meeting of their opposite.
  MOWBRAY. Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground
    And dash themselves to pieces.
    In goodly form comes on the enemy;
    And, by the ground they hide, I judge their number
    Upon or near the rate of thirty thousand.
  MOWBRAY. The just proportion that we gave them out.
    Let us sway on and face them in the field.
    You, reverend father, and these noble lords,
    Had not been here to dress the ugly form
    Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touch'd,
    Out of the speech of peace, that bears such grace,
    Into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war;
  ARCHBISHOP. Wherefore do I this? So the question stands.
    Troop in the throngs of military men;
    But rather show awhile like fearful war
    We see which way the stream of time doth run
    And are enforc'd from our most quiet there
    By the rough torrent of occasion;
    And have the summary of all our griefs,
    Which long ere this we offer'd to the King,
    The dangers of the days but newly gone,
    Whose memory is written on the earth
    With yet appearing blood, and the examples
    Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms;
    Wherein have you been galled by the King;
  ARCHBISHOP. My brother general, the commonwealth,
    To brother horn an household cruelty,
    Or if there were, it not belongs to you.
    That feel the bruises of the days before,
    And suffer the condition of these times
    Construe the times to their necessities,
    And you shall say, indeed, it is the time,
    And not the King, that doth you injuries.
    Either from the King or in the present time,
    To all the Duke of Norfolk's signiories,
    Your noble and right well-rememb'red father's?
  MOWBRAY. What thing, in honour, had my father lost
    The King that lov'd him, as the state stood then,
    And then that Henry Bolingbroke and he,
    Being mounted and both roused in their seats,
    Their neighing coursers daring of the spur,
    Their armed staves in charge, their beavers down,
    And the loud trumpet blowing them together-
    Then, then, when there was nothing could have stay'd
    My father from the breast of Bolingbroke,
    O, when the King did throw his warder down-
    His own life hung upon the staff he threw-
    Then threw he down himself, and all their lives
    The Earl of Hereford was reputed then
    In England the most valiant gentleman.
    Who knows on whom fortune would then have smil'd?
    But if your father had been victor there,
    For all the country, in a general voice,
    Cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and love
    Were set on Hereford, whom they doted on,
    And bless'd and grac'd indeed more than the King.
    You shall enjoy them, everything set off
    Our men more perfect in the use of arms,
    Our armour all as strong, our cause the best;
    Say you not, then, our offer is compell'd.
  WESTMORELAND. That argues but the shame of your offence:
  HASTINGS. Hath the Prince John a full commission,
    In very ample virtue of his father,
  WESTMORELAND. That is intended in the general's name.
    And knit our powers to the arm of peace.
  WESTMORELAND. This will I show the general. Please you, lords,
    And either end in peace- which God so frame!-
    Or to the place of diff'rence call the swords
    Shall to the King taste of this action;
  ARCHBISHOP. No, no, my lord. Note this: the King is weary
    Revives two greater in the heirs of life;
    And therefore will he wipe his tables clean,
    And hangs resolv'd correction in the arm
  HASTINGS. Besides, the King hath wasted all his rods
    And therefore be assur'd, my good Lord Marshal,
    Grow stronger for the breaking.
  MOWBRAY. Your Grace of York, in God's name then, set forward.
Another part of the forest
Enter, from one side, MOWBRAY, attended; afterwards, the ARCHBISHOP,
HASTINGS, and others; from the other side, PRINCE JOHN of LANCASTER,
WESTMORELAND, OFFICERS, and others
    When that your flock, assembled by the bell,
    Your exposition on the holy text
    Turning the word to sword, and life to death.
    And ripens in the sunshine of his favour,
    Would he abuse the countenance of the king,
    How deep you were within the books of God?
    To us the speaker in His parliament,
    Between the grace, the sanctities of heaven,
    But you misuse the reverence of your place,
    Employ the countenance and grace of heav'n
    Under the counterfeited zeal of God,
    The subjects of His substitute, my father,
    And both against the peace of heaven and him
    Have here up-swarm'd them.
    I am not here against your father's peace;
    The which hath been with scorn shov'd from the court,
    Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.
    To the last man.
    If they miscarry, theirs shall second them;
    To sound the bottom of the after-times.
  WESTMORELAND. Pleaseth your Grace to answer them directly
    How far forth you do like their articles.
  PRINCE JOHN. I like them all and do allow them well;
    And swear here, by the honour of my blood,
    My father's purposes have been mistook;
    My lord, these griefs shall be with speed redress'd;
    Upon my soul, they shall. If this may please you,
    Discharge your powers unto their several counties,
    As we will ours; and here, between the armies,
    Let's drink together friendly and embrace,
    That all their eyes may bear those tokens home
  ARCHBISHOP. I take your princely word for these redresses.
    And thereupon I drink unto your Grace.
  HASTINGS. Go, Captain, and deliver to the army
    This news of peace. Let them have pay, and part.
    I know it will please them. Hie thee, Captain.
    For I am on the sudden something ill.
    But heaviness foreruns the good event.
  MOWBRAY. So much the worse, if your own rule be true.
  PRINCE JOHN. The word of peace is rend'red. Hark, how they shout!
  ARCHBISHOP. A peace is of the nature of a conquest;
    For then both parties nobly are subdu'd,
    And neither party loser.
    March by us, that we may peruse the men
    And, ere they be dismiss'd, let them march by.
  PRINCE JOHN. I trust, lords, we shall lie to-night together.
    Will not go off until they hear you speak.
  PRINCE JOHN. They know their duties.
    Like youthful steers unyok'd, they take their courses
  WESTMORELAND. Good tidings, my Lord Hastings; for the which
    I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason;
  PRINCE JOHN. I pawn'd thee none:
    I promis'd you redress of these same grievances
    But for you, rebels- look to taste the due
    Most shallowly did you these arms commence,
    Strike up our drums, pursue the scatt'red stray.
    Some guard these traitors to the block of death,
Another part of the forest
  COLVILLE. I am a knight sir; and my name is Colville of the Dale.
  FALSTAFF. Well then, Colville is your name, a knight is your
    degree, and your place the Dale. Colville shall still be your
    name, a traitor your degree, and the dungeon your place- a place
    deep enough; so shall you be still Colville of the Dale.
    sir, or shall I sweat for you? If I do sweat, they are the drops
    of thy lovers, and they weep for thy death; therefore rouse up
    and not a tongue of them all speaks any other word but my name.
    An I had but a belly of any indifferency, I were simply the most
                            BLUNT, and others
  PRINCE JOHN. The heat is past; follow no further now.
    Call in the powers, good cousin Westmoreland.
    When everything is ended, then you come.
    One time or other break some gallows' back.
    knew yet but rebuke and check was the reward of valour. Do you
    old motion, the expedition of thought? I have speeded hither with
    the very extremest inch of possibility; I have found'red nine
    my pure and immaculate valour, taken Sir John Colville of the
    He saw me, and yielded; that I may justly say with the hook-nos'd
    beseech your Grace, let it be book'd with the rest of this day's
    deeds; or, by the Lord, I will have it in a particular ballad
    else, with mine own picture on the top on't, Colville kissing my
    foot; to the which course if I be enforc'd, if you do not all
    show like gilt twopences to me, and I, in the clear sky of fame,
    o'ershine you as much as the full moon doth the cinders of the
    element, which show like pins' heads to her, believe not the word
    of the noble. Therefore let me have right, and let desert mount.
  FALSTAFF. Let it shine, then.
    That led me hither. Had they been rul'd by me,
    You should have won them dearer than you have.
  FALSTAFF. I know not how they sold themselves; but thou, like a
    kind fellow, gavest thyself away gratis; and I thank thee for
    thee.
                                         Exeunt BLUNT and others
    And now dispatch we toward the court, my lords.
    I hear the King my father is sore sick.
  FALSTAFF. I would you had but the wit; 'twere better than your
    he drinks no wine. There's never none of these demure boys come
    to any proof; for thin drink doth so over-cool their blood, and
    making many fish-meals, that they fall into a kind of male
    green-sickness; and then, when they marry, they get wenches. They
    operation in it. It ascends me into the brain; dries me there all
    the foolish and dull and crudy vapours which environ it; makes it
    delectable shapes; which delivered o'er to the voice, the tongue,
    which is the birth, becomes excellent wit. The second property of
    your excellent sherris is the warming of the blood; which before,
    cold and settled, left the liver white and pale, which is the
    badge of pusillanimity and cowardice; but the sherris warms it,
    and makes it course from the inwards to the parts extremes. It
    illumineth the face, which, as a beacon, gives warning to all the
    rest of this little kingdom, man, to arm; and then the vital
    commoners and inland petty spirits muster me all to their
    captain, the heart, who, great and puff'd up with this retinue,
    that skill in the weapon is nothing without sack, for that sets
    it that Prince Harry is valiant; for the cold blood he did
    naturally inherit of his father, he hath, like lean, sterile, and
    the first humane principle I would teach them should be to
    forswear thin potations and to addict themselves to sack.
  FALSTAFF. Let them go. I'll through Gloucestershire, and there will
Enter the KING, PRINCE THOMAS OF CLARENCE, PRINCE HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER,
WARWICK, and others
    And pause us till these rebels, now afoot,
    Come underneath the yoke of government.
    Where is the Prince your brother?
  KING. Is not his brother, Thomas of Clarence, with him?
  CLARENCE. What would my lord and father?
  KING. Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence.
    How chance thou art not with the Prince thy brother?
    He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas.
    Than all thy brothers; cherish it, my boy,
    Between his greatness and thy other brethren.
    Nor lose the good advantage of his grace
    As flaws congealed in the spring of day.
    His temper, therefore, must be well observ'd.
    Confound themselves with working. Learn this, Thomas,
    A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in,
    That the united vessel of their blood,
    As, force perforce, the age will pour it in-
  CLARENCE. He is not there to-day; he dines in London.
  CLARENCE. With Poins, and other his continual followers.
  KING. Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds;
    And he, the noble image of my youth,
    Is overspread with them; therefore my grief
    Stretches itself beyond the hour of death.
    When means and lavish manners meet together,
    Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the language,
    'Tis needful that the most immodest word
    Your Highness knows, comes to no further use
    The Prince will, in the perfectness of time,
    Cast off his followers; and their memory
    By which his Grace must mete the lives of other,
  KING. 'Tis seldom when the bee doth leave her comb
    In the dead carrion.
    Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings, and all,
    Are brought to the correction of your law.
    Which ever in the haunch of winter sings
    And, when they stand against you, may they fall
    The Earl Northumberland and the Lord Bardolph,
    Are by the shrieve of Yorkshire overthrown.
    The manner and true order of the fight
  KING. And wherefore should these good news make me sick?
    She either gives a stomach and no food-
    Such are the poor, in health- or else a feast,
    And takes away the stomach- such are the rich
  CLARENCE. O my royal father!
  WARWICK. Be patient, Princes; you do know these fits
  CLARENCE. No, no; he cannot long hold out these pangs.
    Hath wrought the mure that should confine it in
  PRINCE HUMPHREY. The people fear me; for they do observe
    Unfather'd heirs and loathly births of nature.
    The seasons change their manners, as the year
    Had found some months asleep, and leapt them over.
    And the old folk, Time's doting chronicles,
  WARWICK. Speak lower, Princes, for the King recovers.
    Into some other chamber. Softly, pray.                Exeunt
Westminster. Another chamber
and others in attendance
  KING. Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends;
  WARWICK. Call for the music in the other room.
  KING. Set me the crown upon my pillow here.
  PRINCE. Who saw the Duke of Clarence?
  CLARENCE. I am here, brother, full of heaviness.
    How doth the King?
  PRINCE. Heard he the good news yet? Tell it him.
  PRINCE HUMPHREY. He alt'red much upon the hearing it.
    The King your father is dispos'd to sleep.
  CLARENCE. Let us withdraw into the other room.
  PRINCE. No; I will sit and watch here by the King.
                                       Exeunt all but the PRINCE
    Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
    That keep'st the ports of slumber open wide
    Snores out the watch of night. O majesty!
    There lies a downy feather which stirs not.
    Perforce must move. My gracious lord! my father!
    Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood
    Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously.
    My due from thee is this imperial crown,
    Derives itself to me.  [Putting on the crown]  Lo where it sits-
    Which God shall guard; and put the world's whole strength
    This lineal honour from me. This from thee
  CLARENCE. Doth the King call?
  CLARENCE. We left the Prince my brother here, my liege,
  PRINCE HUMPHREY. He came not through the chamber where we stay'd.
  KING. Where is the crown? Who took it from my pillow?
    Find him, my lord of Warwick; chide him hither.
    For this the foolish over-careful fathers
    Have broke their sleep with thoughts,
    Their brains with care, their bones with industry;
    For this they have engrossed and pil'd up
    For this they have been thoughtful to invest
    When, like the bee, tolling from every flower
    We bring it to the hive, and, like the bees,
    Yields his engrossments to the ending father.
  WARWICK. My lord, I found the Prince in the next room,
    With gentle eye-drops. He is coming hither.
  KING. But wherefore did he take away the crown?
    Lo where he comes. Come hither to me, Harry.
    Depart the chamber, leave us here alone.
                          Exeunt all but the KING and the PRINCE
  KING. Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought.
    I stay too long by thee, I weary thee.
    That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honours
    Thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm thee.
    Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thyself;
    And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear
    Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse
    Give that which gave thee life unto the worms.
    Harry the Fifth is crown'd. Up, vanity:
    And to the English court assemble now,
    Revel the night, rob, murder, and commit
    The oldest sins the newest kind of ways?
    For the fifth Harry from curb'd license plucks
    The muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog
    And he that wears the crown immortally
    And thus upbraided it: 'The care on thee depending
    Hath fed upon the body of my father;
    Other, less fine in carat, is more precious,
    That had before my face murd'red my father-
    Did with the least affection of a welcome
    Give entertainment to the might of it,
    And make me as the poorest vassal is,
    That thou mightst win the more thy father's love,
    Come hither, Harry; sit thou by my bed,
    And hear, I think, the very latest counsel
    That ever I shall breathe. God knows, my son,
    To thee it shall descend with better quiet,
    For all the soil of the achievement goes
    With me into the earth. It seem'd in me
    My gain of it by their assistances;
    Wounding supposed peace. All these bold fears
    Changes the mood; for what in me was purchas'd
    Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort;
    So thou the garland wear'st successively.
    Have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out;
    I cut them off; and had a purpose now
    To lead out many to the Holy Land,
    Lest rest and lying still might make them look
    May waste the memory of the former days.
    How I came by the crown, O God, forgive;
    And grant it may with thee in true peace live!
    'Gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.
       Enter PRINCE JOHN OF LANCASTER, WARWICK, LORDS, and others
  PRINCE JOHN. Health, peace, and happiness, to my royal father!
    From this bare wither'd trunk. Upon thy sight
    Unto the lodging where I first did swoon?
  KING. Laud be to God! Even there my life must end.
    Which vainly I suppos'd the Holy Land.
    But bear me to that chamber; there I'll lie;
    shall not be admitted; there is no excuse shall serve; you shall
    Davy; let me see- yea, marry, William cook, bid him come hither.
    again, sir- shall we sow the headland with wheat?
  SHALLOW. With red wheat, Davy. But for William cook- are there no
  DAVY. Yes, sir. Here is now the smith's note for shoeing and
  DAVY. Now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be had; and,
    sir, do you mean to stop any of William's wages about the sack he
    lost the other day at Hinckley fair?
  DAVY. Doth the man of war stay all night, sir?
    better than a penny in purse. Use his men well, Davy; for they
  DAVY. No worse than they are backbitten, sir; for they have
    therefore, I beseech you, let him be countenanc'd.
  SHALLOW. I thank thee with all my heart, kind Master Bardolph.
    [To the PAGE]  And welcome, my tall fellow. Come, Sir John.
    wonderful thing to see the semblable coherence of his men's
    spirits and his. They, by observing of him, do bear themselves
    like foolish justices: he, by conversing with them, is turned
    conjunction with the participation of society that they flock
    together in consent, like so many wild geese. If I had a suit to
    Master Shallow, I would humour his men with the imputation of
    being near their master; if to his men, I would curry with Master
    certain that either wise bearing or ignorant carriage is caught,
    as men take diseases, one of another; therefore let men take heed
    of their company. I will devise matter enough out of this Shallow
    to keep Prince Harry in continual laughter the wearing out of six
    had the ache in his shoulders! O, you shall see him laugh till
Enter, severally, WARWICK, and the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE
  WARWICK. How now, my Lord Chief Justice; whither away?
  CHIEF JUSTICE. How doth the King?
  WARWICK. He's walk'd the way of nature;
  WARWICK. Indeed, I think the young king loves you not.
    To welcome the condition of the time,
                     WESTMORELAND, and others
  WARWICK. Here comes the heavy issue of dead Harry.
    O that the living Harry had the temper
    Of he, the worst of these three gentlemen!
    How many nobles then should hold their places
    I am the sorrier; would 'twere otherwise.
    I'll to the King my master that is dead,
  WARWICK. Here comes the Prince.
    Brothers, you mix your sadness with some fear.
    This is the English, not the Turkish court;
    But Harry Harry. Yet be sad, good brothers,
    That I will deeply put the fashion on,
    And wear it in my heart. Why, then, be sad;
    But entertain no more of it, good brothers,
    I'll be your father and your brother too;
  BROTHERS. We hope no otherwise from your Majesty.
    May this be wash'd in Lethe and forgotten?
  CHIEF JUSTICE. I then did use the person of your father;
    The image of his power lay then in me;
    Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth,
    The image of the King whom I presented,
    Whereon, as an offender to your father,
    And did commit you. If the deed were ill,
    Be you contented, wearing now the garland,
    To trip the course of law, and blunt the sword
    That guards the peace and safety of your person;
    Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours;
    Be now the father, and propose a son;
    And then imagine me taking your part
    Therefore still bear the balance and the sword;
    So shall I live to speak my father's words:
    Into the hands of justice.' You did commit me;
    With this remembrance- that you use the same
    With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit
    You shall be as a father to my youth;
    My father is gone wild into his grave,
    To mock the expectation of the world,
    Now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea,
    Where it shall mingle with the state of floods,
    That the great body of our state may go
    In equal rank with the best govern'd nation;
    In which you, father, shall have foremost hand.
Enter FALSTAFF, SHALLOW, SILENCE, BARDOLPH, the PAGE, and DAVY
    of caraways, and so forth. Come, cousin Silence. And then to bed.
    John. By the mass, I have drunk too much sack at supper. A good
              And praise God for the merry year;
              And lusty lads roam here and there,
    meat, we'll have in drink. But you must bear; the heart's all.
  SHALLOW. Be merry, Master Bardolph; and, my little soldier there,
  DAVY.  [To BARDOLPH]  There's a dish of leather-coats for you.
         And drink unto the leman mine;
  SILENCE. An we shall be merry, now comes in the sweet o' th' night.
         Fill the cup, and let it come,
    the cabileros about London.
  BARDOLPH. An I might see you there, Davy!
  SHALLOW. By the mass, you'R crack a quart together- ha! will you
  SHALLOW. By God's liggens, I thank thee. The knave will stick by
    thee, I can assure thee that. 'A will not out, 'a; 'tis true
  SHALLOW. Why, there spoke a king. Lack nothing; be merry.
    [One knocks at door]  Look who's at door there, ho! Who knocks?
  SILENCE. Is't so? Why then, say an old man can do somewhat.
  DAVY. An't please your worship, there's one Pistol come from the
  FALSTAFF. From the court? Let him come in.
  FALSTAFF. What wind blew you hither, Pistol?
  PISTOL. Not the ill wind which blows no man to good. Sweet knight,
    thou art now one of the greatest men in this realm.
    And helter-skelter have I rode to thee;
  FALSTAFF. I pray thee now, deliver them like a man of this world.
  PISTOL. A foutra for the world and worldlings base!
    Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof.
  PISTOL. Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons?
  PISTOL. Why, then, lament therefore.
  SHALLOW. Give me pardon, sir. If, sir, you come with news from the
    court, I take it there's but two ways- either to utter them or
    conceal them. I am, sir, under the King, in some authority.
  PISTOL. Harry the Fourth- or Fifth?
  SHALLOW. Harry the Fourth.
    Harry the Fifth's the man. I speak the truth.
  FALSTAFF. What, is the old king dead?
    choose what office thou wilt in the land, 'tis thine. Pistol, I
    will double-charge thee with dignities.
    I know the young King is sick for me. Let us take any man's
    horses: the laws of England are at my commandment. Blessed are
    they that have been my friends; and woe to my Lord Chief Justice!
    'Where is the life that late I led?' say they.
    Why, here it is; welcome these pleasant days!         Exeunt
    that I might have thee hang'd. Thou hast drawn my shoulder out of
  DOLL. Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie. Come on; I'll tell thee what,
    thou damn'd tripe-visag'd rascal, an the child I now go with do
    miscarry, thou wert better thou hadst struck thy mother, thou
  HOSTESS. O the Lord, that Sir John were come! He would make this a
    bloody day to somebody. But I pray God the fruit of her womb
    the man is dead that you and Pistol beat amongst you.
Westminster. Near the Abbey
  THIRD GROOM. 'Twill be two o'clock ere they come from the
        Trumpets sound, and the KING and his train pass
       over the stage. After them enter FALSTAFF, SHALLOW,
  FALSTAFF. Stand here by me, Master Robert Shallow; I will make the
    but mark the countenance that he will give me.
    I had had to have made new liveries, I would have bestowed the
    show doth better; this doth infer the zeal I had to see him.
    else in oblivion, as if there were nothing else to be done but to
    And make thee rage.
    Hal'd thither
                         [Shouts,within, and the trumpets sound]
  PISTOL. There roar'd the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.
        Enter the KING and his train, the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE
                               among them
  PISTOL. The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal imp of fame!
  FALSTAFF. God save thee, my sweet boy!
  FALSTAFF. My king! my Jove! I speak to thee, my heart!
  KING. I know thee not, old man. Fall to thy prayers.
    Leave gormandizing; know the grave doth gape
    For thee thrice wider than for other men-
    Presume not that I am the thing I was,
    For God doth know, so shall the world perceive,
    The tutor and the feeder of my riots.
    Till then I banish thee, on pain of death,
    As I have done the rest of my misleaders,
    To see perform'd the tenour of our word.
    Set on.                        Exeunt the KING and his train
    seem thus to the world. Fear not your advancements; I will be the
            Re-enter PRINCE JOHN, the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE,
  CHIEF JUSTICE. Go, carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet;
    Take them away.
           Exeunt all but PRINCE JOHN and the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE
  PRINCE JOHN. I like this fair proceeding of the King's.
    But all are banish'd till their conversations
    Appear more wise and modest to the world.
  CHIEF JUSTICE. And so they are.
    Whose music, to my thinking, pleas'd the King.
  First my fear, then my curtsy, last my speech. My fear, is your
prove mine own marring. But to the purpose, and so to the venture.
Be it known to you, as it is very well, I was lately here in the end
you- but, indeed, to pray for the Queen.
satisfaction, and so would I. All the gentlewomen here have forgiven
me. If the gentlemen will not, then the gentlemen do not agree with
the gentlewomen, which was never seen before in such an assembly.
meat, our humble author will continue the story, with Sir John in
it, and make you merry with fair Katherine of France; where, for
is not the man. My tongue is weary; when my legs are too, I will bid
  DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, brother to the King
  DUKE OF EXETER, Uncle to the King
  DUKE OF YORK, cousin to the King
  EARL OF CAMBRIDGE, conspirator against the King
  SIR THOMAS ERPINGHAM, officer in the King's army
  BATES,    soldier in the King's army
  LEWIS, the Dauphin                DUKE OF BURGUNDY
  AMBASSADORS to the King of England
  HOSTESS of the Boar's Head, Eastcheap; formerly Mrs. Quickly, now
   And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!
   Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,
   Assume the port of Mars; and at his heels,
   Within this wooden O the very casques
   That did affright the air at Agincourt?
   Suppose within the girdle of these walls
   Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them
   Printing their proud hoofs i' th' receiving earth;
   Carry them here and there, jumping o'er times,
   Into an hour-glass; for the which supply,
London. An ante-chamber in the KING'S palace
Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY and the BISHOP OF ELY
   Which in th' eleventh year of the last king's reign
   But that the scambling and unquiet time
   Did push it out of farther question.
   We lose the better half of our possession;
   For all the temporal lands which men devout
   By testament have given to the church
   Would they strip from us; being valu'd thus-
   As much as would maintain, to the King's honour,
   And to the coffers of the King, beside,
   A thousand pounds by th' year: thus runs the bill.
 CANTERBURY. 'T would drink the cup and all.
 ELY. And a true lover of the holy Church.
   The breath no sooner left his father's body
 ELY. We are blessed in the change.
   You would desire the King were made a prelate;
   And the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears
   So that the art and practic part of life
   Must be the mistress to this theoric;
 ELY. The strawberry grows underneath the nettle,
   And so the Prince obscur'd his contemplation
   Under the veil of wildness; which, no doubt,
   Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night,
   And therefore we must needs admit the means
   Urg'd by the Commons? Doth his Majesty
   Or rather swaying more upon our part
   Than ever at one time the clergy yet
   Save that there was not time enough to hear,
   And generally to the crown and seat of France,
   Deriv'd from Edward, his great-grandfather.
   Crav'd audience; and the hour, I think, is come
   Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.
London. The Presence Chamber in the KING'S palace
Enter the KING, GLOUCESTER, BEDFORD, EXETER, WARWICK, WESTMORELAND,
              Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY and
                       the BISHOP OF ELY
    Why the law Salique, that they have in France,
    Suits not in native colours with the truth;
    Shall drop their blood in approbation
    We charge you, in the name of God, take heed;
    'Gainst him whose wrongs gives edge unto the swords
    But this, which they produce from Pharamond:
    Which Salique land the French unjustly gloze
    To be the realm of France, and Pharamond
    Yet their own authors faithfully affirm
    That the land Salique is in Germany,
    Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe;
    Where Charles the Great, having subdu'd the Saxons,
    Who, holding in disdain the German women
    For some dishonest manners of their life,
    Establish'd then this law: to wit, no female
    Then doth it well appear the Salique law
    Was not devised for the realm of France;
    Nor did the French possess the Salique land
    Idly suppos'd the founder of this law;
    Who died within the year of our redemption
    Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great
    Subdu'd the Saxons, and did seat the French
    Beyond the river Sala, in the year
    Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say,
    Make claim and title to the crown of France.
    Hugh Capet also, who usurp'd the crown
    Of Charles the Duke of Lorraine, sole heir male
    Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great,
    Daughter to Charlemain, who was the son
    To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son
    Of Charles the Great. Also King Lewis the Tenth,
    Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet,
    Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied
    That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother,
    Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare,
    Daughter to Charles the foresaid Duke of Lorraine;
    By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great
    Was re-united to the Crown of France.
    So that, as clear as is the summer's sun,
    To hold in right and tide of the female;
    So do the kings of France unto this day,
    Howbeit they would hold up this Salique law
    To bar your Highness claiming from the female;
    And rather choose to hide them in a net
    Than amply to imbar their crooked tides
    For in the book of Numbers is it writ,
    When the man dies, let the inheritance
    Descend unto the daughter. Gracious lord,
    And your great-uncle's, Edward the Black Prince,
    Who on the French ground play'd a tragedy,
    Making defeat on the fun power of France,
    Whiles his most mighty father on a hill
    With half their forces the full pride of France,
    And let another half stand laughing by,
  ELY. Awake remembrance of these valiant dead,
    And with your puissant arm renew their feats.
    You are their heir; you sit upon their throne;
    The blood and courage that renowned them
    Is in the very May-morn of his youth,
  EXETER. Your brother kings and monarchs of the earth
    As did the former lions of your blood.
    Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England
    And lie pavilion'd in the fields of France.
  CANTERBURY. O, let their bodies follow, my dear liege,
    In aid whereof we of the spiritualty
    As never did the clergy at one time
  KING HENRY. We must not only arm t' invade the French,
    Against the Scot, who will make road upon us
    Our inland from the pilfering borderers.
  KING HENRY. We do not mean the coursing snatchers only,
    But fear the main intendment of the Scot,
    For you shall read that my great-grandfather
    But that the Scot on his unfurnish'd kingdom
    Came pouring, like the tide into a breach,
    Galling the gleaned land with hot assays,
  CANTERBURY. She hath been then more fear'd than harm'd, my liege;
    As is the ooze and bottom of the sea
  WESTMORELAND. But there's a saying, very old and true:
    For once the eagle England being in prey,
    To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot
    Playing the mouse in absence of the cat,
  EXETER. It follows, then, the cat must stay at home;
    And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.
    While that the armed hand doth fight abroad,
    Obedience; for so work the honey bees,
    Others like merchants venture trade abroad;
    Others like soldiers, armed in their stings,
    Make boot upon the summer's velvet buds,
    Which pillage they with merry march bring home
    To the tent-royal of their emperor;
    The civil citizens kneading up the honey,
    As many lines close in the dial's centre;
    Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
  KING HENRY. Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin.
    And yours, the noble sinews of our power,
    Or break it all to pieces; or there we'll sit,
    Or lay these bones in an unworthy urn,
    Tombless, with no remembrance over them.
    Either our history shall with full mouth
    Now are we well prepar'd to know the pleasure
    Your greeting is from him, not from the King.
    Tell us the Dauphin's mind.
  AMBASSADOR. Thus then, in few.
    Did claim some certain dukedoms in the right
    Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third.
    In answer of which claim, the Prince our master
    And bids you be advis'd there's nought in France
    You cannot revel into dukedoms there.
    He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,
    Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim
    Hear no more of you. This the Dauphin speaks.
  KING HENRY. We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us;
    When we have match'd our rackets to these balls,
    Shall strike his father's crown into the hazard.
    That all the courts of France will be disturb'd
    Not measuring what use we made of them.
    And therefore, living hence, did give ourself
    That men are merriest when they are from home.
    But tell the Dauphin I will keep my state,
    But I will rise there with so full a glory
    That I will dazzle all the eyes of France,
    Yea, strike the Dauphin blind to look on us.
    And tell the pleasant Prince this mock of his
    Shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance
    That shall fly with them; for many a thousand widows
    Shall this his mock mock of their dear husbands;
    Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down;
    That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin's scorn.
    But this lies all within the will of God,
    Tell you the Dauphin, I am coming on,
    So get you hence in peace; and tell the Dauphin
    Convey them with safe conduct. Fare you well.
  KING HENRY. We hope to make the sender blush at it.
    Therefore let our proportions for these wars
    More feathers to our wings; for, God before,
    We'll chide this Dauphin at his father's door.
  CHORUS. Now all the youth of England are on fire,
    And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies;
    Now thrive the armourers, and honour's thought
    Reigns solely in the breast of every man;
    They sell the pasture now to buy the horse,
    Following the mirror of all Christian kings
    For now sits Expectation in the air,
    And hides a sword from hilts unto the point
    Shake in their fear and with pale policy
    Seek to divert the English purposes.
    What mightst thou do that honour would thee do,
    But see thy fault! France hath in thee found out
    One, Richard Earl of Cambridge, and the second,
    Henry Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third,
    Have, for the gilt of France- O guilt indeed!-
    And by their hands this grace of kings must die-
    If hell and treason hold their promises,
    The sum is paid, the traitors are agreed,
    The King is set from London, and the scene
    There is the play-house now, there must you sit,
    And thence to France shall we convey you safe
    And bring you back, charming the narrow seas
    But, till the King come forth, and not till then,
London. Before the Boar's Head Tavern, Eastcheap
    serve, there shall be smiles- but that shall be as it may. I dare
    cold as another man's sword will; and there's an end.
    be all three sworn brothers to France. Let't be so, good Corporal
  NYM. Faith, I will live so long as I may, that's the certain of it;
    rest, that is the rendezvous of it.
  NYM. I cannot tell; things must be as they may. Men may sleep, and
    they may have their throats about them at that time; and some say
    Now by this hand, I swear I scorn the term;
    dozen or fourteen gentlewomen that live honestly by the prick of
    their needles, but it will be thought we keep a bawdy-house
  PISTOL. Pish for thee, Iceland dog! thou prick-ear'd cur of
    I do retort the 'solus' in thy bowels;
    as I may, and thaes the humour of it.
  BARDOLPH. Hear me, hear me what I say: he that strikes the first
    stroke I'll run him up to the hilts, as I am a soldier.
                           [PISTOL and Nym sheathe their swords]
  NYM. I will cut thy throat one time or other, in fair terms; that
    is the humour of it.
    That is the word. I thee defy again.
    No; to the spital go,
    And from the powd'ring tub of infamy
    Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid's kind,
    I have, and I will hold, the quondam Quickly
    For the only she; and- pauca, there's enough.
                        Enter the Boy
    thy face between his sheets, and do the office of a warming-pan.
  HOSTESS. By my troth, he'll yield the crow a pudding one of these
    days: the King has kill'd his heart. Good husband, come home
    together; why the devil should we keep knives to cut one
    another's throats?
  NYM. You'll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at betting?
  PISTOL. Base is the slave that pays.
  NYM. That now I will have; that's the humour of it.
  BARDOLPH. By this sword, he that makes the first thrust I'll kill
  PISTOL. Sword is an oath, and oaths must have their course.
                                            [Sheathes his sword]
    thou wilt not, why then be enemies with me too. Prithee put up.
    And liquor likewise will I give to thee,
    And friendship shall combine, and brotherhood.
    Unto the camp, and profits will accrue.
  NYM. [Shaking hands] Well, then, that's the humour of't.
  NYM. The King hath run bad humours on the knight; that's the even
  PISTOL. Nym, thou hast spoke the right;
  PISTOL. Let us condole the knight; for, lambkins, we will live.
  BEDFORD. Fore God, his Grace is bold, to trust these traitors.
  WESTMORELAND. How smooth and even they do bear themselves,
    As if allegiance in their bosoms sat,
  BEDFORD. The King hath note of all that they intend,
    By interception which they dream not of.
  EXETER. Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow,
               Trumpets sound. Enter the KING, SCROOP,
  KING HENRY. Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard.
    Think you not that the pow'rs we bear with us
    Will cut their passage through the force of France,
    Doing the execution and the act
    For which we have in head assembled them?
    Under the sweet shade of your government.
  GREY. True: those that were your father's enemies
    Have steep'd their galls in honey, and do serve you
  KING HENRY. We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
    And shall forget the office of our hand
    According to the weight and worthiness.
    Enlarge the man committed yesterday
    After the taste of much correction.
    Though Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in their dear care
    Who are the late commissioners?
  KING HENRY. Then, Richard Earl of Cambridge, there is yours;
    Read them, and know I know your worthiness.
    So much complexion? Look ye how they change!
    Their cheeks are paper. Why, what read you there
    As dogs upon their masters, worrying you.
    And sworn unto the practices of France
    To kill us here in Hampton; to the which
    What shall I say to thee, Lord Scroop, thou cruel,
    Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels,
    That knew'st the very bottom of my soul,
    Could out of thee extract one spark of evil
    That, though the truth of it stands off as gross
    Treason and murder ever kept together,
    As two yoke-devils sworn to either's purpose,
    That admiration did not whoop at them;
    That wrought upon thee so preposterously
    Hath got the voice in hell for excellence;
    And other devils that suggest by treasons
    But he that temper'd thee bade thee stand up,
    Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason,
    Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor.
    If that same demon that hath gull'd thee thus
    Should with his lion gait walk the whole world,
    And tell the legions 'I can never win
    Why, so didst thou. Seem they grave and learned?
    Why, so didst thou. Come they of noble family?
    Why, so didst thou. Seem they religious?
    Why, so didst thou. Or are they spare in diet,
    Constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood,
    Not working with the eye without the ear,
    And but in purged judgment trusting neither?
    To mark the full-fraught man and best indued
    With some suspicion. I will weep for thee;
    Another fall of man. Their faults are open.
    Arrest them to the answer of the law;
    And God acquit them of their practices!
  EXETER. I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Richard Earl
    I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Henry Lord Scroop
    I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Thomas Grey,
    Although my body pay the price of it.
  CAMBRIDGE. For me, the gold of France did not seduce,
    At the discovery of most dangerous treason
    Receiv'd the golden earnest of our death;
    We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence,
    Of all your dear offences. Bear them hence.
    Now, lords, for France; the enterprise whereof
    But every rub is smoothed on our way.
    Our puissance into the hand of God,
    Cheerly to sea; the signs of war advance;
Eastcheap. Before the Boar's Head tavern
  HOSTESS. Prithee, honey-sweet husband, let me bring thee to
    Bardolph, be blithe; Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins;
    And we must earn therefore.
  BARDOLPH. Would I were with him, wheresome'er he is, either in
    between twelve and one, ev'n at the turning o' th' tide; for
    after I saw him fumble with the sheets, and play with flowers,
    and smile upon his fingers' end, I knew there was but one way;
    there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet.
    So 'a bade me lay more clothes on his feet; I put my hand into
    the bed and felt them, and they were as cold as any stone; then I
  BOY. Yes, that 'a did, and said they were devils incarnate.
  BOY. 'A said once the devil would have him about women.
  HOSTESS. 'A did in some sort, indeed, handle women; but then he was
    rheumatic, and talk'd of the Whore of Babylon.
  BARDOLPH. Well, the fuel is gone that maintain'd that fire: that's
    all the riches I got in his service.
    And Holdfast is the only dog, my duck.
    To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck.
  BOY. And that's but unwholesome food, they say.
  NYM. I cannot kiss, that is the humour of it; but adieu.
  PISTOL. Let housewifery appear; keep close, I thee command.
Flourish. Enter the FRENCH KING, the DAUPHIN, the DUKES OF BERRI
and BRITAINE, the CONSTABLE, and others
  FRENCH KING. Thus comes the English with full power upon us;
    Therefore the Dukes of Berri and of Britaine,
    As waters to the sucking of a gulf.
    It fits us, then, to be as provident
    Left by the fatal and neglected English
  DAUPHIN. My most redoubted father,
    It is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe;
    To view the sick and feeble parts of France;
    Question your Grace the late ambassadors
    With what great state he heard their embassy,
    Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,
    So the proportions of defence are fill'd;
    And all our princes capdv'd by the hand
    Up in the air, crown'd with the golden sun-
    Mangle the work of nature, and deface
    The patterns that by God and by French fathers
  FRENCH KING. We'll give them present audience. Go and bring them.
    Most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten
    Runs far before them. Good my sovereign,
    Take up the English short, and let them know
    Of what a monarchy you are the head.
  FRENCH KING. From our brother of England?
    He wills you, in the name of God Almighty,
    To him and to his heirs- namely, the crown,
    By custom and the ordinance of times,
    Unto the crown of France. That you may know
    Pick'd from the worm-holes of long-vanish'd days,
    Nor from the dust of old oblivion rak'd,
    Edward the Third, he bids you then resign
    From him, the native and true challenger.
  EXETER. Bloody constraint; for if you hide the crown
    Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it.
    And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord,
    Deliver up the crown; and to take mercy
    On the poor souls for whom this hungry war
    Turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries,
    The dead men's blood, the privy maidens' groans,
    For husbands, fathers, and betrothed lovers,
    Unless the Dauphin be in presence here,
  FRENCH KING. For us, we will consider of this further;
    Back to our brother of England.
  DAUPHIN. For the Dauphin:
    Thus says my king: an if your father's Highness
    Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty,
  DAUPHIN. Say, if my father render fair return,
    I did present him with the Paris balls.
    Were it the mistress court of mighty Europe;
    Between the promise of his greener days
    And these he masters now. Now he weighs time
    Even to the utmost grain; that you shall read
    With silken streamers the young Phorbus fanning.
    Play with your fancies; and in them behold
    Upon the hempen tackle ship-boys climbing;
    Hear the shrill whistle which doth order give
    To sounds confus'd; behold the threaden sails,
    Draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea,
    Breasting the lofty surge. O, do but think
    You stand upon the rivage and behold
    Either past or not arriv'd to pith and puissance;
    Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege;
    Behold the ordnance on their carriages,
    Suppose th' ambassador from the French comes back;
    Tells Harry that the King doth offer him
    Katherine his daughter, and with her to dowry
    The offer likes not; and the nimble gunner
    With linstock now the devilish cannon touches,
    And down goes all before them. Still be kind,
Alarum. Enter the KING, EXETER, BEDFORD, GLOUCESTER,
  KING. Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more;
    Or close the wall up with our English dead.
    In peace there's nothing so becomes a man
    But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
    Then imitate the action of the tiger:
    Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
    Then lend the eye a terrible aspect;
    Let it pry through the portage of the head
    Like the brass cannon: let the brow o'erwhelm it
    Swill'd with the wild and wasteful ocean.
    Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide;
    Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
    Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof-
    Fathers that like so many Alexanders
    Have in these parts from morn till even fought,
    And sheath'd their swords for lack of argument.
    Dishonour not your mothers; now attest
    That those whom you call'd fathers did beget you.
    And teach them how to war. And you, good yeomen,
    For there is none of you so mean and base
    I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
    Straining upon the start. The game's afoot:
  BARDOLPH. On, on, on, on, on! to the breach, to the breach!
  NYM. Pray thee, Corporal, stay; the knocks are too hot, and for
    hot; that is the very plain-song of it.
                   But thither would I hie.
  FLUELLEN. Up to the breach, you dogs!
    Avaunt, you cullions!                 [Driving them forward]
  BOY. As young as I am, I have observ'd these three swashers. I am
    boy to them all three; but all they three, though they would
    red-fac'd; by the means whereof 'a faces it out, but fights not.
    For Pistol, he hath a killing tongue and a quiet sword; by the
    he hath heard that men of few words are the best men, and
    therefore he scorns to say his prayers lest 'a should be thought
    sworn brothers in filching, and in Calais they stole a
    fire-shovel; I knew by that piece of service the men would carry
    coals. They would have me as familiar with men's pockets as their
    gloves or their handkerchers; which makes much against my
    manhood, if I should take from another's pocket to put into mine;
    for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs. I must leave them and
    seek some better service; their villainy goes against my weak
    stomach, and therefore I must cast it up.               Exit
  GOWER. Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to the mines; the
  FLUELLEN. To the mines! Tell you the Duke it is not so good to come
    to the mines; for, look you, the mines is not according to the
    disciplines of the war; the concavities of it is not sufficient.
    For, look you, th' athversary- you may discuss unto the Duke,
    look you- is digt himself four yard under the countermines; by
    Cheshu, I think 'a will plow up all, if there is not better
  GOWER. The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is
    given, is altogether directed by an Irishman- a very vallant
  FLUELLEN. By Cheshu, he is an ass, as in the world: I will verify
    as much in his beard; he has no more directions in the true
    disciplines of the wars, look you, of the Roman disciplines, than
  GOWER. Here 'a comes; and the Scots captain, Captain Jamy, with
    he will maintain his argument as well as any military man in the
    world, in the disciplines of the pristine wars of the Romans.
  GOWER. How now, Captain Macmorris! Have you quit the mines? Have
    the pioneers given o'er?
    the trompet sound the retreat. By my hand, I swear, and my
    father's soul, the work ish ill done; it ish give over; I would
    have blowed up the town, so Chrish save me, la, in an hour. O,
    concerning the disciplines of the war, the Roman wars, in the way
    satisfy my opinion, and partly for the satisfaction, look you, of
    my mind, as touching the direction of the military discipline,
    that is the point.
    is hot, and the weather, and the wars, and the King, and the
    Dukes; it is no time to discourse. The town is beseech'd, and the
    trumpet call us to the breach; and we talk and, be Chrish, do
    stand still; it is shame, by my hand; and there is throats to be
    cut, and works to be done; and there ish nothing done, so Chrish
  JAMY. By the mess, ere theise eyes of mine take themselves to
    sall I suerly do, that is the breff and the long. Marry, I wad
    correction, there is not many of your nation-
  FLUELLEN. Look you, if you take the matter otherwise than is meant,
    you; being as good a man as yourself, both in the disciplines of
    war and in the derivation of my birth, and in other
  GOWER. Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.
  FLUELLEN. Captain Macmorris, when there is more better opportunity
    the disciplines of war; and there is an end.          Exeunt
Before the gates of Harfleur
Enter the GOVERNOR and some citizens on the walls.  Enter the KING
and all his train before the gates
  KING HENRY. How yet resolves the Governor of the town?
    This is the latest parle we will admit;
    If I begin the batt'ry once again,
    I will not leave the half-achieved Harfleur
    And the flesh'd soldier, rough and hard of heart,
    What is it then to me if impious war,
    Array'd in flames, like to the prince of fiends,
    If your pure maidens fall into the hand
    When down the hill he holds his fierce career?
    Upon th' enraged soldiers in their spoil,
    As send precepts to the Leviathan
    Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace
    O'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds
    Defile the locks of your shrill-shrieking daughters;
    Your fathers taken by the silver beards,
    And their most reverend heads dash'd to the walls;
    Whiles the mad mothers with their howls confus'd
    Do break the clouds, as did the wives of Jewry
    Go you and enter Harfleur; there remain,
    And fortify it strongly 'gainst the French;
    Use mercy to them all. For us, dear uncle,
    To-morrow for the march are we addrest.
               [Flourish. The KING and his train enter the town]
Enter the KING OF FRANCE, the DAUPHIN, DUKE OF BRITAINE,
the CONSTABLE OF FRANCE, and others
  FRENCH KING. 'Tis certain he hath pass'd the river Somme.
    The emptying of our fathers' luxury,
    Spirt up so suddenly into the clouds,
    And overlook their grafters?
    Mort Dieu, ma vie! if they march along
  CONSTABLE. Dieu de batailles! where have they this mettle?
    Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull;
    On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,
    Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water,
    A drench for sur-rein'd jades, their barley-broth,
    Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
    Poor we call them in their native lords!
    Our mettle is bred out, and they will give
    Their bodies to the lust of English youth
  BRITAINE. They bid us to the English dancing-schools
  FRENCH KING. Where is Montjoy the herald? Speed him hence;
    More sharper than your swords, hie to the field:
    With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur.
    Rush on his host as doth the melted snow
    Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat
  CONSTABLE. This becomes the great.
    His soldiers sick and famish'd in their march;
    He'll drop his heart into the sink of fear,
  GOWER. How now, Captain Fluellen! Come you from the bridge?
  FLUELLEN. I assure you there is very excellent services committed
    at the bridge.
  GOWER. Is the Duke of Exeter safe?
    not- God be praised and blessed!- any hurt in the world, but
    keeps the bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. There
    is an aunchient Lieutenant there at the bridge- I think in my
    man of no estimation in the world; but I did see him do as
  FLUELLEN. Here is the man.
  PISTOL. Captain, I thee beseech to do me favours.
    The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.
    That stands upon the rolling restless stone-
    signify to you, which is the moral of it, that she is turning,
    rolls. In good truth, the poet makes a most excellent description
    But Exeter hath given the doom of death
    Therefore, go speak- the Duke will hear thy voice;
    Speak, Captain, for his life, and I will thee requite.
  PISTOL. Why then, rejoice therefore.
    for if, look you, he were my brother, I would desire the Duke to
  FLUELLEN. I'll assure you, 'a utt'red as prave words at the pridge
  GOWER. Why, 'tis a gull a fool a rogue, that now and then goes to
    the wars to grace himself, at his return into London, under the
    form of a soldier. And such fellows are perfect in the great
    commanders' names; and they will learn you by rote where services
    terms the enemy stood on; and this they con perfectly in the
    phrase of war, which they trick up with new-tuned oaths; and what
    a beard of the General's cut and a horrid suit of the camp will
    thought on. But you must learn to know such slanders of the age,
    the man that he would gladly make show to the world he is; if I
    Hark you, the King is coming; and I must speak with him from the
         Drum and colours. Enter the KING and his poor soldiers,
  KING HENRY. How now, Fluellen! Cam'st thou from the bridge?
    gallantly maintain'd the pridge; the French is gone off, look
    you, and there is gallant and most prave passages. Marry, th'
    athversary was have possession of the pridge; but he is enforced
    to retire, and the Duke of Exeter is master of the pridge; I can
    tell your Majesty the Duke is a prave man.
    reasonable great; marry, for my part, I think the Duke hath lost
    church- one Bardolph, if your Majesty know the man; his face is
    give express charge that in our marches through the country there
    be nothing compell'd from the villages, nothing taken but paid
    for, none of the French upbraided or abused in disdainful
    language; for when lenity and cruelty play for a kingdom the
    gentler gamester is the soonest winner.
  KING HENRY. Well then, I know thee; what shall I know of thee?
    sufferance. Bid him therefore consider of his ransom, which must
    proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we have lost,
    the disgrace we have digested; which, in weight to re-answer, his
    poor; for th' effusion of our blood, the muster of his kingdom
  KING HENRY. Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee back,
    Without impeachment; for, to say the sooth-
    Who when they were in health, I tell thee, herald,
    Go, therefore, tell thy master here I am;
    Though France himself and such another neighbour
  GLOUCESTER. I hope they will not come upon us now.
  KING HENRY. We are in God's hand, brother, not in theirs.
    March to the bridge, it now draws toward night;
    Beyond the river we'll encamp ourselves,
    And on to-morrow bid them march away.                 Exeunt
Enter the CONSTABLE OF FRANCE, the LORD RAMBURES, the DUKE OF ORLEANS,
the DAUPHIN, with others
  CONSTABLE. Tut! I have the best armour of the world.
  CONSTABLE. It is the best horse of Europe.
  ORLEANS. You are as well provided of both as any prince in the
    any that treads but on four pasterns. Ca, ha! he bounds from the
    earth as if his entrails were hairs; le cheval volant, the
    am a hawk. He trots the air; the earth sings when he touches it;
    the basest horn of his hoof is more musical than the pipe of
  ORLEANS. He's of the colour of the nutmeg.
  DAUPHIN. And of the heat of the ginger. It is a beast for Perseus:
    he is pure air and fire; and the dull elements of earth and water
    rider mounts him; he is indeed a horse, and all other jades you
  DAUPHIN. It is the prince of palfreys; his neigh is like the
  DAUPHIN. Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the rising of
    the lark to the lodging of the lamb, vary deserved praise on my
    palfrey. It is a theme as fluent as the sea: turn the sands into
    eloquent tongues, and my horse is argument for them all: 'tis a
    sovereign to ride on; and for the world- familiar to us and
    unknown- to lay apart their particular functions and wonder at
  DAUPHIN. Then did they imitate that which I compos'd to my courser;
  DAUPHIN. Me well; which is the prescript praise and perfection of a
  DAUPHIN. O, then belike she was old and gentle; and you rode like a
  DAUPHIN. Be warn'd by me, then: they that ride so, and ride not
    warily, fall into foul bogs. I had rather have my horse to my
  DAUPHIN. I tell thee, Constable, my mistress wears his own hair.
    proverb so little kin to the purpose.
  RAMBURES. My Lord Constable, the armour that I saw in your tent
  DAUPHIN. Some of them will fall to-morrow, I hope.
    way; but I would it were morning, for I would fain be about the
    ears of the English.
  CONSTABLE. You must first go yourself to hazard ere you have them.
  RAMBURES. He longs to eat the English.
  ORLEANS. By the white hand of my lady, he's a gallant prince.
  CONSTABLE. Swear by her foot, that she may tread out the oath.
  ORLEANS. He is simply the most active gentleman of France.
  ORLEANS. And I will take up that with 'Give the devil his due.'
  CONSTABLE. Well plac'd! There stands your friend for the devil;
    have at the very eye of that proverb with 'A pox of the devil!'
  ORLEANS. You are the better at proverbs by how much 'A fool's bolt
  ORLEANS. 'Tis not the first time you were overshot.
  MESSENGER. My Lord High Constable, the English lie within fifteen
  CONSTABLE. Who hath measur'd the ground?
    Alas, poor Harry of England! he longs not for the dawning as we
  CONSTABLE. If the English had any apprehension, they would run
  ORLEANS. That they lack; for if their heads had any intellectual
    armour, they could never wear such heavy head-pieces.
    their mastiffs are of unmatchable courage.
  ORLEANS. Foolish curs, that run winking into the mouth of a Russian
    bear, and have their heads crush'd like rotten apples! You may as
    well say that's a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the
  CONSTABLE. Just, just! and the men do sympathise with the mastiffs
    in robustious and rough coming on, leaving their wits with their
    wives; and then give them great meals of beef and iron and steel;
    they will eat like wolves and fight like devils.
  ORLEANS. Ay, but these English are shrewdly out of beef.
  CONSTABLE. Then shall we find to-morrow they have only stomachs to
    When creeping murmur and the poring dark
    Fills the wide vessel of the universe.
    From camp to camp, through the foul womb of night,
    The hum of either army stilly sounds,
    That the fix'd sentinels almost receive
    The secret whispers of each other's watch.
    Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames
    Each battle sees the other's umber'd face;
    Piercing the night's dull ear; and from the tents
    The armourers accomplishing the knights,
    The country cocks do crow, the clocks do ton,
    And the third hour of drowsy morning name.
    Proud of their numbers and secure in soul,
    Do the low-rated English play at dice;
    And chide the cripple tardy-gaited night
    Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires
    The morning's danger; and their gesture sad
    Presenteth them unto the gazing moon
    Bids them good morrow with a modest smile,
    And calls them brothers, friends, and countrymen.
    Upon his royal face there is no note
    Unto the weary and all-watched night;
    A largess universal, like the sun,
    A little touch of Harry in the night.
    And so our scene must to the battle fly;
    Minding true things by what their mock'ries be.         Exit
Enter the KING, BEDFORD, and GLOUCESTER
    The greater therefore should our courage be.
    Good morrow, brother Bedford. God Almighty!
    Besides, they are our outward consciences
    Thus may we gather honey from the weed,
    And make a moral of the devil himself.
  KING HENRY. 'Tis good for men to love their present pains
    Upon example; so the spirit is eased;
    And when the mind is quick'ned, out of doubt
    Break up their drowsy grave and newly move
    Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers both,
    Commend me to the princes in our camp;
    Do my good morrow to them, and anon
    Desire them all to my pavilion.
    Go with my brothers to my lords of England;
    And then I would no other company.
  ERPINGHAM. The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry!
                                         Exeunt all but the KING
  PISTOL. Trail'st thou the puissant pike?
  PISTOL. As good a gentleman as the Emperor.
  KING HENRY. Then you are a better than the King.
    I love the lovely bully. What is thy name?
  PISTOL. The figo for thee, then!
  FLUELLEN. So! in the name of Jesu Christ, speak fewer. It is the
    greatest admiration in the universal world, when the true and
    aunchient prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept: if you
    would take the pains but to examine the wars of Pompey the Great,
    you shall find, I warrant you, that there is no tiddle-taddle nor
    pibble-pabble in Pompey's camp; I warrant you, you shall find the
    ceremonies of the wars, and the cares of it, and the forms of it,
    and the sobriety of it, and the modesty of it, to be otherwise.
  GOWER. Why, the enemy is loud; you hear him all night.
  FLUELLEN. If the enemy is an ass, and a fool, and a prating
  COURT. Brother John Bates, is not that the morning which breaks
  BATES. I think it be; but we have no great cause to desire the
  WILLIAMS. We see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think we
    shall never see the end of it. Who goes there?
    off the next tide.
  BATES. He hath not told his thought to the King?
    to you, I think the King is but a man as I am: the violet smells
    to him as it doth to me; the element shows to him as it doth to
    affections are higher mounted than ours, yet, when they stoop,
    they stoop with the like wing. Therefore, when he sees reason of
    fears, as we do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same relish
    cold a night as 'tis, he could wish himself in Thames up to the
  KING HENRY. By my troth, I will speak my conscience of the King: I
    alone, howsoever you speak this, to feel other men's minds;
    methinks I could not die anywhere so contented as in the King's
    we know we are the King's subjects. If his cause be wrong, our
    obedience to the King wipes the crime of it out of us.
  WILLIAMS. But if the cause be not good, the King himself hath a
    chopp'd off in a battle, shall join together at the latter day
    for a surgeon, some upon their wives left poor behind them, some
    upon the debts they owe, some upon their children rawly left. I
    am afeard there are few die well that die in a battle; for how
    can they charitably dispose of anything when blood is their
    argument? Now, if these men do not die well, it will be a black
    matter for the King that led them to it; who to disobey were
  KING HENRY. So, if a son that is by his father sent about
    merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the sea, the imputation of
    his wickedness, by your rule, should be imposed upon his father
    many irreconcil'd iniquities, you may call the business of the
    master the author of the servant's damnation. But this is not so:
    the King is not bound to answer the particular endings of his
    soldiers, the father of his son, nor the master of his servant;
    for they purpose not their death when they purpose their
    services. Besides, there is no king, be his cause never so
    spotless, if it come to the arbitrement of swords, can try it out
    with all unspotted soldiers: some peradventure have on them the
    virgins with the broken seals of perjury; some, making the wars
    their bulwark, that have before gored the gentle bosom of peace
    with pillage and robbery. Now, if these men have defeated the law
    and outrun native punishment, though they can outstrip men they
    vengeance; so that here men are punish'd for before-breach of the
    King's laws in now the King's quarrel. Where they feared the
    death they have borne life away; and where they would be safe
    they perish. Then if they die unprovided, no more is the King
    guilty of their damnation than he was before guilty of those
    impieties for the which they are now visited. Every subject's
    duty is the King's; but every subject's soul is his own.
    Therefore should every soldier in the wars do as every sick man
    death is to him advantage; or not dying, the time was blessedly
    others how they should prepare.
  WILLIAMS. 'Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon his
    own head- the King is not to answer for it.
  KING HENRY. I myself heard the King say he would not be ransom'd.
    throats are cut he may be ransom'd, and we ne'er the wiser.
  WILLIAMS. You pay him then! That's a perilous shot out of an
    monarch! You may as well go about to turn the sun to ice with
    fanning in his face with a peacock's feather. You'll never trust
    with you, if the time were convenient.
  WILLIAMS. How shall I know thee again?
    bonnet; then if ever thou dar'st acknowledge it, I will make it
  WILLIAMS. Here's my glove; give me another of thine.
    take thee a box on the ear.
  KING HENRY. Well, I will do it, though I take thee in the King's
  WILLIAMS. Keep thy word. Fare thee well.
  KING HENRY. Indeed, the French may lay twenty French crowns to one
    they will beat us, for they bear them on their shoulders; but it
    is no English treason to cut French crowns, and to-morrow the
    Upon the King! Let us our lives, our souls,
    Our children, and our sins, lay on the King!
    Twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath
    Creating awe and fear in other men?
    Than they in fearing.
    And bid thy ceremony give thee cure!
    Thinks thou the fiery fever will go out
    Canst thou, when thou command'st the beggar's knee,
    Command the health of it? No, thou proud dream,
    I am a king that find thee; and I know
    'Tis not the balm, the sceptre, and the ball,
    The sword, the mace, the crown imperial,
    The farced tide running fore the king,
    The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp
    That beats upon the high shore of this world-
    No, not all these, thrice gorgeous ceremony,
    Not all these, laid in bed majestical,
    Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave
    Never sees horrid night, the child of hell;
    But, like a lackey, from the rise to set
    Sweats in the eye of Pheebus, and all night
    And follows so the ever-running year
    Had the fore-hand and vantage of a king.
    The slave, a member of the country's peace,
    What watch the king keeps to maintain the peace
    Whose hours the peasant best advantages.
    Collect them all together at my tent:
    I'll be before thee.
    Possess them not with fear! Take from them now
    Pluck their hearts from them! Not to-day, O Lord,
    O, not to-day, think not upon the fault
    My father made in compassing the crown!
    Who twice a day their wither'd hands hold up
    Two chantries, where the sad and solemn priests
  KING HENRY. My brother Gloucester's voice? Ay;
    I know thy errand, I will go with thee;
Enter the DAUPHIN, ORLEANS, RAMBURES, and others
  DAUPHIN. Mount them, and make incision in their hides,
    That their hot blood may spin in English eyes,
    And dout them with superfluous courage, ha!
  RAMBURES. What, will you have them weep our horses' blood?
    How shall we then behold their natural tears?
    And your fair show shall suck away their souls,
    Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
    Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins
    And sheathe for lack of sport. Let us but blow on them,
    The vapour of our valour will o'erturn them.
    And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound
    The tucket sonance and the note to mount;
    For our approach shall so much dare the field
    Yond island carrions, desperate of their bones,
    Ill-favouredly become the morning field;
    And our air shakes them passing scornfully;
    Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggar'd host,
    With torch-staves in their hand; and their poor jades
    Lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips,
    The gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes,
    And in their pale dull mouths the gimmal'd bit
    And their executors, the knavish crows,
    Fly o'er them, all impatient for their hour.
    To demonstrate the life of such a battle
  CONSTABLE. They have said their prayers and they stay for death.
  DAUPHIN. Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits,
    And give their fasting horses provender,
    And after fight with them?
  CONSTABLE. I stay but for my guidon. To the field!
    I will the banner from a trumpet take,
    The sun is high, and we outwear the day.              Exeunt
  GLOUCESTER. Where is the King?
  BEDFORD. The King himself is rode to view their battle.
  WESTMORELAND. Of fighting men they have full three-score thousand.
  EXETER. There's five to one; besides, they all are fresh.
  BEDFORD. Farewell, good Salisbury; and good luck go with thee!
    And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it,
    For thou art fram'd of the firm truth of valour.
                            Enter the KING
    The fewer men, the greater share of honour.
    God's will! I pray thee, wish not one man more.
    I am the most offending soul alive.
    For the best hope I have. O, do not wish one more!
    Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through my host,
    This day is call'd the feast of Crispian.
    And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
    Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours,
    Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter,
    Be in their flowing cups freshly rememb'red.
    This story shall the good man teach his son;
    From this day to the ending of the world,
    We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
    Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile,
    Shall think themselves accurs'd they were not here,
    And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
    The French are bravely in their battles set,
  WESTMORELAND. Perish the man whose mind is backward now!
  MONTJOY. Once more I come to know of thee, King Harry,
    For certainly thou art so near the gulf
    The constable desires thee thou wilt mind
    Thy followers of repentance, that their souls
    From off these fields, where, wretches, their poor bodies
  KING HENRY. Who hath sent thee now?
  KING HENRY. I pray thee bear my former answer back:
    Bid them achieve me, and then sell my bones.
    Good God! why should they mock poor fellows thus?
    The man that once did sell the lion's skin
    While the beast liv'd was kill'd with hunting him.
    Find native graves; upon the which, I trust,
    And those that leave their valiant bones in France,
    They shall be fam'd; for there the sun shall greet them
    And draw their honours reeking up to heaven,
    Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,
    Mark then abounding valour in our English,
    That, being dead, like to the bullet's grazing
    Let me speak proudly: tell the Constable
    We are but warriors for the working-day;
    With rainy marching in the painful field;
    There's not a piece of feather in our host-
    But, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim;
    They'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
    The gay new coats o'er the French soldiers' heads
    And turn them out of service. If they do this-
    As, if God please, they shall- my ransom then
    They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints;
    Which if they have, as I will leave 'em them,
    Shall yield them little, tell the Constable.
  MONTJOY. I shall, King Harry. And so fare thee well:
                    Enter the DUKE OF YORK
    The leading of the vaward.
    And how thou pleasest, God, dispose the day!          Exeunt
    Come hither, boy; ask me this slave in French
   discuss the same in French unto him.
  BOY. I do not know the French for fer, and ferret, and firk.
    esteems himself happy that he hath fall'n into the hands of one-
    as he thinks- the most brave, valorous, and thrice-worthy
    the saying is true- the empty vessel makes the greatest sound.
    wooden dagger; and they are both hang'd; and so would this be, if
    he durst steal anything adventurously. I must stay with the
    lackeys, with the luggage of our camp. The French might have a
    good prey of us, if he knew of it; for there is none to guard it
Another part of the field of battle
    Be these the wretches that we play'd at dice for?
  ORLEANS. Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?
    Like a base pander, hold the chamber-door
  ORLEANS. We are enow yet living in the field
    To smother up the English in our throngs,
  BOURBON. The devil take order now! I'll to the throng.
Another part of the field
Alarum. Enter the KING and his train, with prisoners; EXETER, and others
    But all's not done- yet keep the French the field.
    From helmet to the spur all blood he was.
    Larding the plain; and by his bloody side,
    And takes him by the beard, kisses the gashes
    Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast;
    We kept together in our chivalry.'
    Upon these words I came and cheer'd him up;
    He smil'd me in the face, raught me his hand,
    And all my mother came into mine eyes
    With mistful eyes, or they will issue too.          [Alarum]
    The French have reinforc'd their scatter'd men.
    Give the word through.                                Exeunt
Another part of the field
  FLUELLEN. Kill the poys and the luggage! 'Tis expressly against the
  GOWER. 'Tis certain there's not a boy left alive; and the cowardly
    rascals that ran from the battle ha' done this slaughter;
    besides, they have burned and carried away all that was in the
    King's tent; wherefore the King most worthily hath caus'd every
    the town's name where Alexander the Pig was born?
  GOWER. Alexander the Great.
    or the mighty, or the huge, or the magnanimous, are all one
    reckonings, save the phrase is a little variations.
  GOWER. I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon; his father
    you, Captain, if you look in the maps of the 'orld, I warrant you
    sall find, in the comparisons between Macedon and Monmouth, that
    the situations, look you, is both alike. There is a river in
    Macedon; and there is also moreover a river at Monmouth; it is
    call'd Wye at Monmouth, but it is out of my prains what is the
    name of the other river; but 'tis all one, 'tis alike as my
    fingers is to my fingers, and there is salmons in both. If you
    after it indifferent well; for there is figures in all things.
  FLUELLEN. It is not well done, mark you now, to take the tales out
    of my mouth ere it is made and finished. I speak but in the
    being in his right wits and his good judgments, turn'd away the
    fat knight with the great belly doublet; he was full of jests,
  FLUELLEN. That is he. I'll tell you there is good men porn at
            Alarum. Enter the KING, WARWICK, GLOUCESTER,
            EXETER, and others, with prisoners. Flourish
    Ride thou unto the horsemen on yond hill;
    If they will fight with us, bid them come down
    Or void the field; they do offend our sight.
    If they'll do neither, we will come to them
    And make them skirr away as swift as stones
    Enforced from the old Assyrian slings;
    Besides, we'll cut the throats of those we have,
    And not a man of them that we shall take
    Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.
  EXETER. Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.
  GLOUCESTER. His eyes are humbler than they us'd to be.
    That I have fin'd these bones of mine for ransom?
    I come to thee for charitable licence,
    To book our dead, and then to bury them;
    For many of our princes- woe the while!-
    So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs
    In blood of princes; and their wounded steeds
    Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters,
    Killing them twice. O, give us leave, great King,
    To view the field in safety, and dispose
    Of their dead bodies!
  KING HENRY. I tell thee truly, herald,
    I know not if the day be ours or no;
    And gallop o'er the field.
  KING HENRY. Then call we this the field of Agincourt,
    Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.
  FLUELLEN. Your grandfather of famous memory, an't please your
    Majesty, and your great-uncle Edward the Plack Prince of Wales,
    as I have read in the chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here
    rememb'red of it, the Welshmen did good service in garden where
    leeks did grow, wearing leeks in their Monmouth caps; which your
    Majesty know to this hour is an honourable badge of the service;
    and I do believe your Majesty takes no scorn to wear the leek
  FLUELLEN. All the water in Wye cannot wash your Majesty's Welsh
    know it; I will confess it to all the 'orld: I need not be
    Bring me just notice of the numbers dead
    On both our parts. Call yonder fellow hither.
  EXETER. Soldier, you must come to the King.
  WILLIAMS. An't please your Majesty, 'tis the gage of one that I
    from the answer of his degree.
  FLUELLEN. Though he be as good a gentleman as the Devil is, as
  KING HENRY. Then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou meet'st the
    literatured in the wars.
  KING HENRY. Call him hither to me, soldier.
    it in thy cap; when Alencon and myself were down together, I
    the hearts of his subjects. I would fain see the man that has but
  KING HENRY. Pray thee, go seek him, and bring him to my tent.
  KING HENRY. My Lord of Warwick and my brother Gloucester,
    Follow Fluellen closely at the heels;
    It is the soldier's: I, by bargain, should
    If that the soldier strike him, as I judge
    Follow, and see there be no harm between them.
    come apace to the King: there is more good toward you
  FLUELLEN. Know the glove? I know the glove is a glove.
  FLUELLEN. 'Sblood, an arrant traitor as any's in the universal
    name, apprehend him: he's a friend of the Duke Alencon's.
  WARWICK. How now! how now! what's the matter?
                  Enter the KING and EXETER
  KING HENRY. How now! what's the matter?
    your Grace, has struck the glove which your Majesty is take out
    of the helmet of Alencon.
  WILLIAMS. My liege, this was my glove: here is the fellow of it;
    avouchment, that this is the glove of Alencon that your Majesty
  KING HENRY. Give me thy glove, soldier; look, here is the fellow of
    there is any martial law in the world.
  WILLIAMS. All offences, my lord, come from the heart; never came
    but as a common man; witness the night, your garments, your
    been as I took you for, I made no offence; therefore, I beseech
    Till I do challenge it. Give him the crowns;
  FLUELLEN. By this day and this light, the fellow has mettle enough
    in his belly: hold, there is twelve pence for you; and I pray you
    quarrels, and dissensions, and, I warrant you, it is the better
  KING HENRY. Now, herald, are the dead numb'red?
  HERALD. Here is the number of the slaught'red French.
  EXETER. Charles Duke of Orleans, nephew to the King;
    Of other lords and barons, knights and squires,
    That in the field lie slain; of princes in this number,
    And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead
    One hundred twenty-six; added to these,
    Eight thousand and four hundred; of the which
    So that, in these ten thousand they have lost,
    The names of those their nobles that lie dead:
    The master of the cross-bows, Lord Rambures;
    Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dolphin;
    The brother to the Duke of Burgundy;
    Where is the number of our English dead?
                                 [HERALD presents another paper]
    Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,
    None else of name; and of all other men
    On one part and on th' other? Take it, God,
  KING HENRY. Come, go we in procession to the village;
    Let there be sung 'Non nobis' and 'Te Deum';
    And then to Calais; and to England then;
  CHORUS. Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story
    That I may prompt them; and of such as have,
    I humbly pray them to admit th' excuse
    Which cannot in their huge and proper life
    Be here presented. Now we bear the King
    Toward Calais. Grant him there. There seen,
    Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach
    Pales in the flood with men, with wives, and boys,
    Whose shouts and claps out-voice the deep-mouth'd sea,
    Which, like a mighty whiffler, fore the King
    Before him through the city. He forbids it,
    In the quick forge and working-house of thought,
    Like to the senators of th' antique Rome,
    With the plebeians swarming at their heels-
    Go forth and fetch their conqu'ring Caesar in;
    Were now the General of our gracious Empress-
    How many would the peaceful city quit
    Did they this Harry. Now in London place him-
    As yet the lamentation of the French
    Invites the King of England's stay at home;
    To order peace between them; and omit
    All the occurrences, whatever chanc'd,
    things. I will tell you, ass my friend, Captain Gower: the
    you and yourself and all the world know to be no petter than a
    again, and then I will tell him a little piece of my desires.
    Hence! I am qualmish at the smell of leek.
    will desire you to live in the meantime, and eat your victuals;
    come, there is sauce for it.  [Striking him again]  You call'd me
    throw none away; the skin is good for your broken coxcomb. When
  FLUELLEN. Ay, leeks is good. Hold you, there is a groat to heal
    another leek in my pocket which you shall eat.
    because he could not speak English in the native garb, he could
    not therefore handle an English cudgel; you find it otherwise,
  PISTOL. Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now?
    And there my rendezvous is quite cut off.
    To England will I steal, and there I'll steal;
    And patches will I get unto these cudgell'd scars,
    And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.                Exit
WESTMORELAND, and other LORDS; at another, the FRENCH KING, QUEEN ISABEL,
the PRINCESS KATHERINE, ALICE, and other LADIES; the DUKE OF BURGUNDY,
    Unto our brother France, and to our sister,
    To our most fair and princely cousin Katherine.
    Most worthy brother England; fairly met!
  QUEEN ISABEL. So happy be the issue, brother England,
    Your eyes, which hitherto have home in them,
    Against the French that met them in their bent,
    Have lost their quality; and that this day
    Since then my office hath so far prevail'd
    What rub or what impediment there is
    Why that the naked, poor, and mangled Peace,
    Should not in this best garden of the world,
    Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart,
    Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts
    Wanting the scythe, all uncorrected, rank,
    Defective in their natures, grow to wildness;
    That I may know the let why gentle Peace
    Should not expel these inconveniences
  KING HENRY. If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the peace
  BURGUNDY. The King hath heard them; to the which as yet
  KING HENRY. Well then, the peace,
    O'erglanced the articles; pleaseth your Grace
    To re-survey them, we will suddenly
  KING HENRY. Brother, we shall. Go, uncle Exeter,
    And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester,
    Warwick, and Huntington, go with the King;
    And we'll consign thereto. Will you, fair sister,
    Go with the princes or stay here with us?
  QUEEN ISABEL. Our gracious brother, I will go with them;
  KING HENRY. Yet leave our cousin Katherine here with us;
    Within the fore-rank of our articles.
                   Exeunt all but the KING, KATHERINE, and ALICE
  KING HENRY. Fair Katherine, and most fair,
  KING HENRY. O fair Katherine, if you will love me soundly with your
  KING HENRY. I said so, dear Katherine, and I must not blush to
  KING HENRY. What says she, fair one? that the tongues of men are
  KING HENRY. The Princess is the better English-woman. I' faith,
    directly to say 'I love you.' Then, if you urge me farther than
    your sake, Kate, why you undid me; for the one I have neither
    words nor measure, and for the other I have no strength in
    on my back, under the correction of bragging be it spoken, I
    that never looks in his glass for love of anything he sees there,
    let thine eye be thy cook. I speak to thee plain soldier. If thou
    canst love me for this, take me; if not, to say to thee that I
    shall die is true- but for thy love, by the Lord, no; yet I love
    thee too. And while thou liv'st, dear Kate, take a fellow of
    plain and uncoined constancy; for he perforce must do thee right,
    because he hath not the gift to woo in other places; for these
    fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme themselves into
    ladies' favours, they do always reason themselves out again.
    wither; a full eye will wax hollow. But a good heart, Kate, is
    the sun and the moon; or, rather, the sun, and not the moon- for
    soldier; take a soldier, take a king. And what say'st thou, then,
    to my love? Speak, my fair, and fairly, I pray thee.
  KING HENRY. No, it is not possible you should love the enemy of
    France, Kate, but in loving me you should love the friend of
    mine and I am yours, then yours is France and you are mine.
  KING HENRY. No, Kate? I will tell thee in French, which I am sure
    let me see, what then? Saint Denis be my speed!- donc votre est
    conquer the kingdom as to speak so much more French: I shall
    never move thee in French, unless it be to laugh at me.
  KING HENRY. Can any of your neighbours tell, Kate? I'll ask them.
    love with your heart. But, good Kate, mock me mercifully; the
    rather, gentle Princess, because I love thee cruelly. If ever
    me thou shalt, I get thee with scambling, and thou must therefore
    English, that shall go to Constantinople and take the Turk by the
    such a boy; and for my English moiety take the word of a king and
    a bachelor. How answer you, la plus belle Katherine du monde, mon
    English, I love thee, Kate; by which honour I dare not swear thou
    notwithstanding the poor and untempering effect of my visage. Now
    beshrew my father's ambition! He was thinking of civil wars when
    he got me; therefore was I created with a stubborn outside, with
    an aspect of iron, that when I come to woo ladies I fright them.
    But, in faith, Kate, the elder I wax, the better I shall appear:
    no more spoil upon my face; thou hast me, if thou hast me, at the
    better. And therefore tell me, most fair Katherine, will you have
    me? Put off your maiden blushes; avouch the thoughts of your
    heart with the looks of an empress; take me by the hand and say
    bless mine ear withal but I will tell thee aloud 'England is
    fellow with the best king, thou shalt find the best king of good
    music and thy English broken; therefore, Queen of all, Katherine,
  KING HENRY. It is not a fashion for the maids in France to kiss
    before they are married, would she say?
    you and I cannot be confin'd within the weak list of a country's
    fashion; we are the makers of manners, Kate; and the liberty that
    follows our places stops the mouth of all find-faults- as I will
    do yours for upholding the nice fashion of your country in
    denying me a kiss; therefore, patiently and yielding.  [Kissing
    her]  You have witchcraft in your lips, Kate: there is more
    eloquence in a sugar touch of them than in the tongues of the
    French council; and they should sooner persuade Henry of England
    than a general petition of monarchs. Here comes your father.
             Enter the FRENCH POWER and the ENGLISH LORDS
    smooth; so that, having neither the voice nor the heart of
    flattery about me, I cannot so conjure up the spirit of love in
  BURGUNDY. Pardon the frankness of my mirth, if I answer you for
    and blind. Can you blame her, then, being a maid yet ros'd over
    with the virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny the appearance of
  KING HENRY. Yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and
  BURGUNDY. They are then excus'd, my lord, when they see not what
    they do.
    like flies at Bartholomew-tide, blind, though they have their
    eyes; and then they will endure handling, which before would not
    so I shall catch the fly, your cousin, in the latter end, and she
  FRENCH KING. Yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities
    turned into a maid; for they are all girdled with maiden walls
  KING HENRY. I am content, so the maiden cities you talk of may wait
    on her; so the maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show
    me the way to my will.
    His daughter first; and then in sequel, all,
    According to their firm proposed natures.
      Where your Majesty demands that the King of France, having any
  FRENCH KING. Nor this I have not, brother, so denied
  KING HENRY. I pray you, then, in love and dear alliance,
    Let that one article rank with the rest;
    And thereupon give me your daughter.
    Issue to me; that the contending kingdoms
    With envy of each other's happiness,
    May cease their hatred; and this dear conjunction
    In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance
  QUEEN ISABEL. God, the best maker of all marriages,
    So be there 'twixt your kingdoms such a spousal
    Which troubles oft the bed of blessed marriage,
    Thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms,
    To make divorce of their incorporate league;
    Receive each other. God speak this Amen!
    And all the peers', for surety of our leagues.
    Our bending author hath pursu'd the story,
    Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.
    By which the world's best garden he achieved,
    Henry the Sixth, in infant bands crown'd king
    Whose state so many had the managing
    That they lost France and made his England bleed;
    Which oft our stage hath shown; and, for their sake,
  DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, uncle to the King, and Protector
  DUKE OF BEDFORD, uncle to the King, and Regent of France
  THOMAS BEAUFORT, DUKE OF EXETER, great-uncle to the king
  HENRY BEAUFORT, great-uncle to the King, BISHOP OF WINCHESTER,
  WOODVILLE, Lieutenant of the Tower
  VERNON, of the White Rose or York faction
  BASSET, of the Red Rose or Lancaster faction
  AN OLD SHEPHERD, father to Joan la Pucelle
  Lords, Warders of the Tower, Heralds, Officers, Soldiers,
The First Part of King Henry the Sixth
Dead March. Enter the funeral of KING HENRY THE FIFTH,
attended on by the DUKE OF BEDFORD, Regent of France,
the DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, Protector, the DUKE OF EXETER,
the EARL OF WARWICK, the BISHOP OF WINCHESTER
  BEDFORD. Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to
    Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky
    And with them scourge the bad revolting stars
    King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long!
    Than mid-day sun fierce bent against their faces.
    What! shall we curse the planets of mishap
    Or shall we think the subtle-witted French
  WINCHESTER. He was a king bless'd of the King of kings;
    Unto the French the dreadful judgment-day
    The battles of the Lord of Hosts he fought;
    And lookest to command the Prince and realm.
    Thy wife is proud; she holdeth thee in awe
  GLOUCESTER. Name not religion, for thou lov'st the flesh;
    And ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'st,
  BEDFORD. Cease, cease these jars and rest your minds in peace;
    Let's to the altar. Heralds, wait on us.
    When at their mothers' moist'ned eyes babes shall suck,
    And none but women left to wail the dead.
  HENRY the Fifth, thy ghost I invocate:
    Combat with adverse planets in the heavens.
    Speak softly, or the loss of those great towns
    These news would cause him once more yield the ghost.
  EXETER. How were they lost? What treachery was us'd?
    Amongst the soldiers this is muttered
    Another would fly swift, but wanteth wings;
    Cropp'd are the flower-de-luces in your arms;
    These tidings would call forth their flowing tides.
  BEDFORD. Me they concern; Regent I am of France.
    Away with these disgraceful wailing robes!
    Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes,
    To weep their intermissive miseries.
  SECOND MESSENGER. Lords, view these letters full of bad
    France is revolted from the English quite,
    O, whither shall we fly from this reproach?
    Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot and the French.
    Retiring from the siege of Orleans,
    By three and twenty thousand of the French
    They pitched in the ground confusedly
    To keep the horsemen off from breaking in.
    More than three hours the fight continued;
    Here, there, and everywhere, enrag'd he slew
    The French exclaim'd the devil was in arms;
    All the whole army stood agaz'd on him.
    And rush'd into the bowels of the battle.
    Here had the conquest fully been seal'd up
    If Sir John Fastolfe had not play'd the coward.
    He, being in the vaward plac'd behind
    With purpose to relieve and follow them-
    Hence grew the general wreck and massacre.
    Enclosed were they with their enemies.
    A base Walloon, to win the Dauphin's grace,
    Thrust Talbot with a spear into the back;
    Whom all France, with their chief assembled strength,
    Durst not presume to look once in the face.
    Most of the rest slaughter'd or took likewise.
  BEDFORD. His ransom there is none but I shall pay.
    I'll hale the Dauphin headlong from his throne;
    His crown shall be the ransom of my friend;
    Four of their lords I'll change for one of ours.
    Since they, so few, watch such a multitude.
    Either to quell the Dauphin utterly,
  GLOUCESTER. I'll to the Tower with all the haste I can
    And then I will proclaim young Henry king.              Exit
  EXETER. To Eltham will I, where the young King is,
    And for his safety there I'll best devise.              Exit
  CHARLES. Mars his true moving, even as in the heavens
    So in the earth, to this day is not known.
    Late did he shine upon the English side;
    Otherwhiles the famish'd English, like pale ghosts,
  ALENCON. They want their porridge and their fat bull
    Either they must be dieted like mules
    And have their provender tied to their mouths,
    Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.
  REIGNIER. Let's raise the siege. Why live we idly here?
  CHARLES. Sound, sound alarum; we will rush on them.
    Now for the honour of the forlorn French!
       Here alarum. They are beaten hack by the English, with
  CHARLES. Who ever saw the like? What men have I!
    But that they left me midst my enemies.
    The other lords, like lions wanting food,
    Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.
    During the time Edward the Third did reign.
  CHARLES. Let's leave this town; for they are hare-brain'd
    And hunger will enforce them to be more eager.
    Of old I know them; rather with their teeth
    The walls they'll tear down than forsake the siege.
    Else ne'er could they hold out so as they do.
    By my consent, we'll even let them alone.
                   Enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS
  BASTARD. Where's the Prince Dauphin? I have news for him.
    Hath the late overthrow wrought this offence?
    A holy maid hither with me I bring,
    And drive the English forth the bounds of France.
    Exceeding the nine sibyls of old Rome:
    For they are certain and unfallible.
                  Re-enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS with
  REIGNIER. Fair maid, is 't thou wilt do these wondrous feats?
    Where is the Dauphin? Come, come from behind;
    I know thee well, though never seen before.
    Be not amaz'd, there's nothing hid from me.
    In private will I talk with thee apart.
    God's Mother deigned to appear to me,
    Otherwise I renounce all confidence.
    The which at Touraine, in Saint Katherine's churchyard,
                 [Here they fight and JOAN LA PUCELLE overcomes]
    And fightest with the sword of Deborah.
  PUCELLE. Christ's Mother helps me, else I were too weak.
  CHARLES. Whoe'er helps thee, 'tis thou that must help me.
    'Tis the French Dauphin sueth to thee thus.
    These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.
    Fight till the last gasp; I will be your guard.
  PUCELLE. Assign'd am I to be the English scourge.
    This night the siege assuredly I'll raise.
    Since I have entered into these wars.
    Glory is like a circle in the water,
    With Henry's death the English circle ends;
    Dispersed are the glories it included.
    Thou with an eagle art inspired then.
    Helen, the mother of great Constantine,
    Nor yet Saint Philip's daughters were like thee.
    Bright star of Venus, fall'n down on the earth,
    How may I reverently worship thee enough?
  ALENCON. Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.
    Drive them from Orleans, and be immortaliz'd.
                London. Before the Tower gates
       Enter the DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, with his serving-men
  GLOUCESTER. I am come to survey the Tower this day;
    Since Henry's death, I fear, there is conveyance.
    Where be these warders that they wait not here?
    Open the gates; 'tis Gloucester that calls.
  FIRST WARDER.  [Within]  Who's there that knocks so
  FIRST SERVING-MAN. It is the noble Duke of Gloucester.
  FIRST SERVING-MAN. Villains, answer you so the Lord
    We do no otherwise than we are will'd.
    There's none Protector of the realm but I.
    Break up the gates, I'll be your warrantize.
                  [GLOUCESTER'S men rush at the Tower gates, and
                         WOODVILLE the Lieutenant speaks within]
    Open the gates; here's Gloucester that would enter.
    Thou art no friend to God or to the King.
    Open the gates, or I'll shut thee out shortly.
  SERVING-MEN. Open the gates unto the Lord Protector,
    Or we'll burst them open, if that you come not quickly.
       Enter to the PROTECTOR at the Tower gates WINCHESTER
    And not Protector of the King or realm.
    I'll canvass thee in thy broad cardinal's hat,
    To slay thy brother Abel, if thou wilt.
  GLOUCESTER. I will not slay thee, but I'll drive thee back.
    I'll use to carry thee out of this place.
  WINCHESTER. Do what thou dar'st; I beard thee to thy face.
    Here by the cheeks I'll drag thee up and down.
  WINCHESTER. Gloucester, thou wilt answer this before the
    Now beat them hence; why do you let them stay?
         Here GLOUCESTER'S men beat out the CARDINAL'S
        men; and enter in the hurly burly the MAYOR OF
    Thus contumeliously should break the peace!
    Hath here distrain'd the Tower to his use.
    Because he is Protector of the realm,
    And would have armour here out of the Tower,
    To crown himself King and suppress the Prince.
  GLOUCESTER. I Will not answer thee with words, but blows.
                                      [Here they skirmish again]
    this day against God's peace and the King's, we charge
  GLOUCESTER. Cardinal, I'll be no breaker of the law;
    This Cardinal's more haughty than the devil.
                                             with their servants
  MAYOR. See the coast clear'd, and then we will depart.
    Good God, these nobles should such stomachs bear!
               Enter, on the walls, the MASTER-GUNNER
    And how the English have the suburbs won.
  BOY. Father, I know; and oft have shot at them,
    How the English, in the suburbs close intrench'd,
    In yonder tower, to overpeer the city,
    And thence discover how with most advantage
    And even these three days have I watch'd
    If I could see them. Now do thou watch,
    And thou shalt find me at the Governor's.               Exit
  BOY. Father, I warrant you; take you no care;
    I'll never trouble you, if I may spy them.              Exit
          Enter SALISBURY and TALBOT on the turrets, with
                            and others
    Discourse, I prithee, on this turret's top.
    Call'd the brave Lord Ponton de Santrailles;
    Once, in contempt, they would have barter'd me;
    Rather than I would be so vile esteem'd.
    But, O! the treacherous Fastolfe wounds my heart
    In open market-place produc'd they me
    Here, said they, is the terror of the French,
    Then broke I from the officers that led me,
    And with my nails digg'd stones out of the ground
    To hurl at the beholders of my shame;
    My grisly countenance made others fly;
    In iron walls they deem'd me not secure;
    So great fear of my name 'mongst them was spread
    That they suppos'd I could rend bars of steel
    Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.
                Enter the BOY with a linstock
    And view the Frenchmen how they fortify.
    Let us look in; the sight will much delight thee.
  GARGRAVE. I think at the North Gate; for there stand lords.
  GLANSDALE. And I here, at the bulwark of the bridge.
                     [Here they shoot and SALISBURY and GARGRAVE
    Henry the Fifth he first train'd to the wars;
    His sword did ne'er leave striking in the field.
    The sun with one eye vieweth all the world.
    Remember to avenge me on the French.'
    Plantagenet, I will; and like thee, Nero,
    Play on the lute, beholding the towns burn.
    What stir is this? What tumult's in the heavens?
    Whence cometh this alarum and the noise?
  MESSENGER. My lord, my lord, the French have gather'd
    Is come with a great power to raise the siege.
    And then we'll try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.
         Here an alarum again, and TALBOT pursueth the
    Our English troops retire, I cannot stay them;
    A woman clad in armour chaseth them.
    Here, here she comes. I'll have a bout with thee.
    Devil or devil's dam, I'll conjure thee;
    Blood will I draw on thee-thou art a witch
  PUCELLE. Come, come, 'tis only I that must disgrace thee.
                                               [Here they fight]
             [A short alarum; then enter the town with soldiers]
    Are from their hives and houses driven away.
    Hark, countrymen! Either renew the fight
    Or tear the lions out of England's coat;
    Sheep run not half so treacherous from the wolf,
    Or horse or oxen from the leopard,
                                 [Alarum. Here another skirmish]
        Flourish. Enter on the walls, LA PUCELLE, CHARLES,
  PUCELLE. Advance our waving colours on the walls;
    Rescu'd is Orleans from the English.
    How shall I honour thee for this success?
    That one day bloom'd and fruitful were the next.
    Recover'd is the town of Orleans.
  REIGNIER. Why ring not out the bells aloud throughout the
    Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfires
    And feast and banquet in the open streets
    To celebrate the joy that God hath given us.
    When they shall hear how we have play'd the men.
  CHARLES. 'Tis Joan, not we, by whom the day is won;
    And all the priests and friars in my realm
    Than the rich jewel'd coffer of Darius,
    Before the kings and queens of France.
    Near to the walls, by some apparent sign
    Let us have knowledge at the court of guard.
    When others sleep upon their quiet beds,
          with scaling-ladders; their drums beating a dead
    By whose approach the regions of Artois,
    This happy night the Frenchmen are secure,
    Embrace we then this opportunity,
    As fitting best to quittance their deceit,
    To join with witches and the help of hell!
  BURGUNDY. Traitors have never other company.
    But what's that Pucelle whom they term so pure?
  TALBOT. A maid, they say.
    If underneath the standard of the French
  TALBOT. Well, let them practise and converse with spirits:
    Let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.
  BEDFORD. Ascend, brave Talbot; we will follow thee.
  TALBOT. Not all together; better far, I guess,
    That if it chance the one of us do fail
    The other yet may rise against their force.
    Now, Salisbury, for thee, and for the right
             [The English scale the walls and cry 'Saint George!
           The French leap o'er the walls in their shirts.
  REIGNIER. If not of hell, the heavens, sure, favour him
    Or will you blame and lay the fault on me?
    That, being captain of the watch to-night,
    As that whereof I had the government,
    About relieving of the sentinels.
    Then how or which way should they first break in?
  PUCELLE. Question, my lords, no further of the case,
    How or which way; 'tis sure they found some place
    But weakly guarded, where the breach was made.
    And now there rests no other shift but this
    To gather our soldiers, scatter'd and dispers'd,
    And lay new platforms to endamage them.
            'A Talbot! A Talbot!' They fly, leaving their
                           clothes behind
  SOLDIER. I'll be so bold to take what they have left.
    Using no other weapon but his name.                     Exit
                      ORLEANS. Within the town
                           and others
    Whose pitchy mantle over-veil'd the earth.
  TALBOT. Bring forth the body of old Salisbury
    And here advance it in the market-place,
    Within their chiefest temple I'll erect
    Upon the which, that every one may read,
    Shall be engrav'd the sack of Orleans,
    I muse we met not with the Dauphin's grace,
  BEDFORD. 'Tis thought, Lord Talbot, when the fight began,
    Rous'd on the sudden from their drowsy beds,
    They did amongst the troops of armed men
    Leap o'er the walls for refuge in the field.
    For smoke and dusky vapours of the night,
    Am sure I scar'd the Dauphin and his trull,
    When arm in arm they both came swiftly running,
    We'll follow them with all the power we have.
    Call ye the warlike Talbot, for his acts
    So much applauded through the realm of France?
  TALBOT. Here is the Talbot; who would speak with him?
    That she may boast she hath beheld the man
    Whose glory fills the world with loud report.
  BURGUNDY. Is it even so? Nay, then I see our wars
  TALBOT. Ne'er trust me then; for when a world of men
    Could not prevail with all their oratory,
    And therefore tell her I return great thanks
    Are often welcomest when they are gone.
  TALBOT. Well then, alone, since there's no remedy,
    Come hither, Captain.  [Whispers]   You perceive my mind?
               Enter the COUNTESS and her PORTER
    And when you have done so, bring the keys to me.
    Great is the rumour of this dreadful knight,
    To give their censure of these rare reports.
  COUNTESS. And he is welcome. What! is this the man?
  COUNTESS. Is this the scourge of France?
    That with his name the mothers still their babes?
    I'll sort some other time to visit you.              [Going]
  COUNTESS. What means he now? Go ask him whither he
    To know the cause of your abrupt departure.
  COUNTESS. If thou be he, then art thou prisoner.
    And for that cause I train'd thee to my house.
    But now the substance shall endure the like
    And I will chain these legs and arms of thine
    That hast by tyranny these many years
  COUNTESS. Why, art not thou the man?
    For what you see is but the smallest part
    I tell you, madam, were the whole frame here,
  COUNTESS. This is a riddling merchant for the nonce;
    How can these contrarieties agree?
    And in a moment makes them desolate.
    And more than may be gathered by thy shape.
    I did not entertain thee as thou art.
    Nor other satisfaction do I crave
    For soldiers' stomachs always serve them well.
         Enter the EARLS OF SOMERSET, SUFFOLK, and WARWICK;
           RICHARD PLANTAGENET, VERNON, and another LAWYER
  SUFFOLK. Within the Temple Hall we were too loud;
  PLANTAGENET. Then say at once if I maintain'd the truth;
  SUFFOLK. Faith, I have been a truant in the law
    And therefore frame the law unto my will.
  SOMERSET. Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then, between us.
  WARWICK. Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch;
    Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth;
    Between two blades, which bears the better temper;
    Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye
    But in these nice sharp quillets of the law,
    And stands upon the honour of his birth,
    But dare maintain the party of the truth,
    And say withal I think he held the right.
    The fewest roses are cropp'd from the tree
    Shall yield the other in the right opinion.
  VERNON. Then, for the truth and plainness of the case,
    Giving my verdict on the white rose side.
    Lest, bleeding, you do paint the white rose red,
    And keep me on the side where still I am.
    For pale they look with fear, as witnessing
    I scorn thee and thy fashion, peevish boy.
    thee.
  SUFFOLK. I'll turn my part thereof into thy throat.
    We grace the yeoman by conversing with him.
    His grandfather was Lionel Duke of Clarence,
    Third son to the third Edward, King of England.
  PLANTAGENET. He bears him on the place's privilege,
    Was not thy father, Richard Earl of Cambridge,
  PLANTAGENET. My father was attached, not attainted;
  SOMERSET. Ay, thou shalt find us ready for thee still;
    And know us by these colours for thy foes
    For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.
    Until it wither with me to my grave,
    Or flourish to the height of my degree.
    And so farewell until I meet thee next.                 Exit
  SOMERSET. Have with thee, Pole. Farewell, ambitious
  WARWICK. This blot that they object against your house
    Shall be wip'd out in the next Parliament,
    Call'd for the truce of Winchester and Gloucester;
    And if thou be not then created York,
    Meantime, in signal of my love to thee,
    Grown to this faction in the Temple Garden,
    Shall send between the Red Rose and the White
  VERNON. In your behalf still will I wear the same.
    This quarrel will drink blood another day.            Exeunt
    Even like a man new haled from the rack,
    And these grey locks, the pursuivants of death,
    Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer.
    Wax dim, as drawing to their exigent;
    And pithless arms, like to a withered vine
    That droops his sapless branches to the ground.
    Yet are these feet, whose strengthless stay is numb,
    As witting I no other comfort have.
    We sent unto the Temple, unto his chamber;
  MORTIMER. Enough; my soul shall then be satisfied.
    And even since then hath Richard been obscur'd,
    But now the arbitrator of despairs,
    And, in that ease, I'll tell thee my disease.
    Some words there grew 'twixt Somerset and me;
    And did upbraid me with my father's death;
    Else with the like I had requited him.
    Therefore, good uncle, for my father's sake,
    And for alliance sake, declare the cause
    My father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.
    Within a loathsome dungeon, there to pine,
    Henry the Fourth, grandfather to this king,
    The first-begotten and the lawful heir
    Of Edward king, the third of that descent;
    During whose reign the Percies of the north,
    Endeavour'd my advancement to the throne.
    The reason mov'd these warlike lords to this
    I was the next by birth and parentage;
    For by my mother I derived am
    To King Edward the Third; whereas he
    They laboured to plant the rightful heir,
    I lost my liberty, and they their lives.
    Long after this, when Henry the Fifth,
    Succeeding his father Bolingbroke, did reign,
    Thy father, Earl of Cambridge, then deriv'd
    Marrying my sister, that thy mother was,
    And have install'd me in the diadem;
    But, as the rest, so fell that noble earl,
    And was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers,
    In whom the title rested, were suppress'd.
  PLANTAGENET. Of Which, my lord, your honour is the last.
    Thou art my heir; the rest I wish thee gather;
    But yet methinks my father's execution
    Strong fixed is the house of Lancaster
    As princes do their courts when they are cloy'd
    Might but redeem the passage of your age!
  MORTIMER. Thou dost then wrong me, as that slaughterer
                Exeunt GAOLERS, hearing out the body of MORTIMER
    Here dies the dusky torch of Mortimer,
    Chok'd with ambition of the meaner sort;
    And therefore haste I to the Parliament,
    Either to be restored to my blood,
Flourish. Enter the KING, EXETER, GLOUCESTER, WARWICK, SOMERSET, and SUFFOLK;
the BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, RICHARD PLANTAGENET, and others.
    That therefore I have forg'd, or am not able
    Verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen.
    As well at London Bridge as at the Tower?
  WINCHESTER. Gloucester, I do defy thee. Lords, vouchsafe
    It is not that that incens'd hath incens'd the Duke:
    No one but he should be about the King;
    And makes him roar these accusations forth.
    Thou bastard of my grandfather!
    But one imperious in another's throne?
  WINCHESTER. And am not I a prelate of the church?
    And useth it to patronage his theft.
  WARWICK. Roam thither then.
  WARWICK. Ay, see the bishop be not overborne.
    And know the office that belongs to such.
    Is not his Grace Protector to the King?
    That gnaws the bowels of the commonwealth.
                  [A noise within: 'Down with the tawny coats!']
    Begun through malice of the Bishop's men.
                Enter the MAYOR OF LONDON, attended
    Pity the city of London, pity us!
    The Bishop and the Duke of Gloucester's men,
    Have fill'd their pockets full of pebble stones
    And, banding themselves in contrary parts,
    Do pelt so fast at one another's pate
    That many have their giddy brains knock'd out.
        Enter in skirmish, the retainers of GLOUCESTER and
    To hold your slaught'ring hands and keep the peace.
    So kind a father of the commonweal,
  FIRST SERVING-MAN. Ay, and the very parings of our nails
    To slay your sovereign and destroy the realm.
  GLOUCESTER. Compassion on the King commands me stoop,
    Or I would see his heart out ere the priest
  WARWICK. Behold, my Lord of Winchester, the Duke
    As by his smoothed brows it doth appear;
  GLOUCESTER. Here, Winchester, I offer thee my hand.
    And will not you maintain the thing you teach,
    But prove a chief offender in the same?
  WINCHESTER. Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee;
  FIRST SERVING-MAN. Content: I'll to the surgeon's.
  THIRD SERVING-MAN. And I will see what physic the tavern
    Which in the right of Richard Plantagenet
    So shall his father's wrongs be recompens'd.
  WINCHESTER. As will the rest, so willeth Winchester.
    But all the whole inheritance I give
    That doth belong unto the house of York,
    And humble service till the point of death.
  KING HENRY. Stoop then and set your knee against my foot;
    I girt thee with the valiant sword of York.
    And as my duty springs, so perish they
  ALL. Welcome, high Prince, the mighty Duke of York!
    To cross the seas and to be crown'd in France:
  KING HENRY. When Gloucester says the word, King Henry
    This late dissension grown betwixt the peers
    Which in the time of Henry nam'd the Fifth
    Was in the mouth of every sucking babe:
            like countrymen, with sacks upon their backs
  PUCELLE. These are the city gates, the gates of Rouen,
    Talk like the vulgar sort of market-men
    That come to gather money for their corn.
    And that we find the slothful watch but weak,
    That Charles the Dauphin may encounter them.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city,
    Poor market-folks that come to sell their corn.
  WATCH. Enter, go in; the market-bell is rung.
  PUCELLE. Now, Rouen, I'll shake thy bulwarks to the
                               [LA PUCELLE, &c., enter the town]
    Now she is there, how will she specify
    Here is the best and safest passage in?
             Enter LA PUCELLE, on the top, thrusting out
  PUCELLE. Behold, this is the happy wedding torch
    But burning fatal to the Talbotites.                    Exit
  BASTARD. See, noble Charles, the beacon of our friend;
    A prophet to the fall of all our foes!
    And then do execution on the watch. Alarum.           Exeunt
    That hardly we escap'd the pride of France.             Exit
                 and REIGNIER, on the walls
    I think the Duke of Burgundy will fast
    'Twas full of darnel-do you like the taste?
    I trust ere long to choke thee with thine own,
    And make thee curse the harvest of that corn.
    Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant age
                 [The English party whisper together in council]
    God speed the parliament! Who shall be the Speaker?
  TALBOT. Dare ye come forth and meet us in the field?
  PUCELLE. Belike your lordship takes us then for fools,
    But unto thee, Alencon, and the rest.
    Like peasant foot-boys do they keep the walls,
  PUCELLE. Away, captains! Let's get us from the walls;
    That we are here.                      Exeunt from the walls
  TALBOT. And there will we be too, ere it be long,
    Either to get the town again or die;
    And as his father here was conqueror,
    So sure I swear to get the town or die.
    Here will I sit before the walls of Rouen,
    Came to the field, and vanquished his foes.
    Methinks I should revive the soldiers' hearts,
    Because I ever found them as myself.
    But gather we our forces out of hand
          Exeunt against the town all but BEDFORD and attendants
  CAPTAIN. Whither away, Sir John Fastolfe, in such haste?
  FASTOLFE. Whither away? To save myself by flight:
    We are like to have the overthrow again.
    All the Talbots in the world, to save my life.          Exit
  CAPTAIN. Cowardly knight! ill fortune follow thee!
                                              Exit into the town
    What is the trust or strength of foolish man?
    They that of late were daring with their scoffs
    Are glad and fain by flight to save themselves.
          An alarum. Re-enter TALBOT, BURGUNDY, and the rest
    Enshrines thee in his heart, and there erects
    Now where's the Bastard's braves, and Charles his gleeks?
    Now will we take some order in the town,
    Placing therein some expert officers;
    And then depart to Paris to the King,
    For there young Henry with his nobles lie.
    For that's the end of human misery.                   Exeunt
        Enter CHARLES, the BASTARD, ALENCON, LA PUCELLE,
    Care is no cure, but rather corrosive,
    If Dauphin and the rest will be but rul'd.
  CHARLES. We have guided by thee hitherto,
    And we will make thee famous through the world.
    And have thee reverenc'd like a blessed saint.
    Employ thee, then, sweet virgin, for our good.
    We will entice the Duke of Burgundy
    To leave the Talbot and to follow us.
  ALENCON. For ever should they be expuls'd from France,
    To bring this matter to the wished end.
    Hark! by the sound of drum you may perceive
    There goes the Talbot, with his colours spread,
    And all the troops of English after him.
            French march. Enter the DUKE OF BURGUNDY and
    Now in the rearward comes the Duke and his.
  CHARLES. A parley with the Duke of Burgundy!
  BURGUNDY. Who craves a parley with the Burgundy?
    Stay, let thy humble handmaid speak to thee.
    And see the cities and the towns defac'd
    By wasting ruin of the cruel foe;
    As looks the mother on her lowly babe
    See, see the pining malady of France;
    Behold the wounds, the most unnatural wounds,
    O, turn thy edged sword another way;
    Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore.
    Return thee therefore with a flood of tears,
  BURGUNDY. Either she hath bewitch'd me with her words,
  PUCELLE. Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee,
    That will not trust thee but for profit's sake?
    And fashion'd thee that instrument of ill,
    Who then but English Henry will be lord,
    Was not the Duke of Orleans thy foe?
    But when they heard he was thine enemy
    See then, thou fight'st against thy countrymen,
    And join'st with them will be thy slaughtermen.
    Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.
  BURGUNDY. I am vanquished; these haughty words of hers
    So, farewell, Talbot; I'll no longer trust thee.
    And seek how we may prejudice the foe.                Exeunt
         Enter the KING, GLOUCESTER, WINCHESTER, YORK,
           VERNON, BASSET, and others. To them, with
    Ascribes the glory of his conquest got
  KING HENRY. Is this the Lord Talbot, uncle Gloucester,
    I do remember how my father said
    Therefore stand up; and for these good deserts
    Disgracing of these colours that I wear
    Dar'st thou maintain the former words thou spak'st?
    Against my lord the Duke of Somerset.
  BASSET. Villain, thou knowest the law of arms is such
    When thou shalt see I'll meet thee to thy cost.
  VERNON. Well, miscreant, I'll be there as soon as you;
Enter the KING, GLOUCESTER, WINCHESTER, YORK, SUFFOLK, SOMERSET, WARWICK,
TALBOT, EXETER, the GOVERNOR OF PARIS, and others
  GLOUCESTER. Lord Bishop, set the crown upon his head.
  WINCHESTER. God save King Henry, of that name the Sixth!
    That you elect no other king but him,
  TALBOT. Shame to the Duke of Burgundy and thee!
    I vow'd, base knight, when I did meet thee next
    To tear the Garter from thy craven's leg,  [Plucking it off]
    Pardon me, princely Henry, and the rest:
    This dastard, at the battle of Patay,
    And that the French were almost ten to one,
    Were there surpris'd and taken prisoners.
    Or whether that such cowards ought to wear
  GLOUCESTER. To say the truth, this fact was infamous
    Knights of the Garter were of noble birth,
    Such as were grown to credit by the wars;
    He then that is not furnish'd in this sort
    Doth but usurp the sacred name of knight,
    Be packing, therefore, thou that wast a knight;
    Henceforth we banish thee on pain of death.
    And now, my Lord Protector, view the letter
  GLOUCESTER.  [Viewing the superscription]  What means his
    No more but plain and bluntly 'To the King!'
    Together with the pitiful complaints
    And join'd with Charles, the rightful King of France.'
  KING HENRY. Is that the worst this letter doth contain?
  GLOUCESTER. It is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.
  KING HENRY. Why then Lord Talbot there shall talk with
  KING HENRY. Then gather strength and march unto him
  VERNON. Grant me the combat, gracious sovereign.
  BASSET. And me, my lord, grant me the combat too.
  KING HENRY. Be patient, lords, and give them leave to speak.
    complain? First let me know, and then I'll answer you.
  BASSET. Crossing the sea from England into France,
    Upbraided me about the rose I wear,
    Saying the sanguine colour of the leaves
    When stubbornly he did repugn the truth
    About a certain question in the law
    Argu'd betwixt the Duke of York and him;
    With other vile and ignominious terms
    I crave the benefit of law of arms.
    Pronouncing that the paleness of this flower
    Bewray'd the faintness of my master's heart.
    Though ne'er so cunningly you smother it.
    And then your Highness shall command a peace.
    Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.
    To trouble and disturb the King and us?
    To bear with their perverse objections,
    Much less to take occasion from their mouths
  KING HENRY. Come hither, you that would be combatants:
    Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause.
    If they perceive dissension in our looks
    How will their grudging stomachs be provok'd
    Beside, what infamy will there arise
    Destroy'd themselves and lost the realm of France!
    O, think upon the conquest of my father,
    That any one should therefore be suspicious
    Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both.
    As well they may upbraid me with my crown,
    Because, forsooth, the King of Scots is crown'd.
    And, therefore, as we hither came in peace,
    To be our Regent in these parts of France.
    Go cheerfully together and digest
    Ourself, my Lord Protector, and the rest,
    From thence to England, where I hope ere long
  WARWICK. My Lord of York, I promise you, the King
    Prettily, methought, did play the orator.
    In that he wears the badge of Somerset.
    Other affairs must now be managed.
    For had the passions of thy heart burst out,
    I fear we should have seen decipher'd there
    This shouldering of each other in the court,
    This factious bandying of their favourites,
    There comes the ruin, there begins confusion.           Exit
  TALBOT. Go to the gates of Bordeaux, trumpeter;
    Summon their general unto the wall.
             Trumpet sounds a parley. Enter, aloft, the
                 GENERAL OF THE FRENCH, and others
    You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
    Who in a moment even with the earth
    If you forsake the offer of their love.
    Our nation's terror and their bloody scourge!
    If thou retire, the Dauphin, well appointed,
    Stands with the snares of war to tangle thee.
    On either hand thee there are squadrons pitch'd
    To wall thee from the liberty of flight,
    And no way canst thou turn thee for redress
    But death doth front thee with apparent spoil
    And pale destruction meets thee in the face.
    Ten thousand French have ta'en the sacrament
    To rive their dangerous artillery
    Lo, there thou stand'st, a breathing valiant man,
    This is the latest glory of thy praise
    That I, thy enemy, due thee withal;
    For ere the glass that now begins to run
    Finish the process of his sandy hour,
    These eyes that see thee now well coloured
    Shall see thee withered, bloody, pale, and dead.
  TALBOT. He fables not; I hear the enemy.
    Out, some light horsemen, and peruse their wings.
    If we be English deer, be then in blood;
    But rather, moody-mad and desperate stags,
    Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steel
    And make the cowards stand aloof at bay.
    And they shall find dear deer of us, my friends.
  YORK. Are not the speedy scouts return'd again
    That dogg'd the mighty army of the Dauphin?
    Two mightier troops than that the Dauphin led,
    Which join'd with him and made their march for
    And cannot help the noble chevalier.
    Never so needful on the earth of France,
    Spur to the rescue of the noble Talbot,
  LUCY. O, send some succour to the distress'd lord!
    We mourn: France smiles. We lose: they daily get-
    I met in travel toward his warlike father.
    And now they meet where both their lives are done.
    That sund'red friends greet in the hour of death.
    But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.
  LUCY. Thus, while the vulture of sedition
    Feeds in the bosom of such great commanders,
    Henry the Fifth. Whiles they each other cross,
                     Other plains of Gascony
  SOMERSET. It is too late; I cannot send them now.
    Might with a sally of the very town
    That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.
  SOMERSET. How now, Sir William! Whither were you sent?
  LUCY. Whither, my lord! From bought and sold Lord
    And whiles the honourable captain there
    You, his false hopes, the trust of England's honour,
    Orleans the Bastard, Charles, Burgundy,
  SOMERSET. York lies; he might have sent and had the horse.
  LUCY. The fraud of England, not the force of France,
    Hath now entrapp'd the noble minded Talbot.
  SOMERSET. Come, go; I will dispatch the horsemen straight;
    Within six hours they will be at his aid.
  SOMERSET. If he be dead, brave Talbot, then, adieu!
  LUCY. His fame lives in the world, his shame in you.       Exeunt
  TALBOT. O young John Talbot! I did send for thee
    To tutor thee in stratagems of war,
    That Talbot's name might be in thee reviv'd
    Should bring thy father to his drooping chair.
    And I'll direct thee how thou shalt escape
    And shall I fly? O, if you love my mother,
  JOHN. Then let me stay; and, father, do you fly.
    Upon my death the French can little boast;
    In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.
    Flight cannot stain the honour you have won;
    But if I bow, they'll say it was for fear.
    If the first hour I shrink and run away.
    Rather than life preserv'd with infamy.
  TALBOT. Shall all thy mother's hopes lie in one tomb?
  JOHN. Ay, rather than I'll shame my mother's womb.
  TALBOT. Upon my blessing I command thee go.
  JOHN. To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.
  TALBOT. Part of thy father may be sav'd in thee.
  TALBOT. Thy father's charge shall clear thee from that stain.
    If death be so apparent, then both fly.
    Stay, go, do what you will, the like do I;
    For live I will not if my father die.
  TALBOT. Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son,
    Come, side by side together live and die;
    And left us to the rage of France his sword.
    I gave thee life and rescu'd thee from death.
  JOHN. O, twice my father, twice am I thy son!
  TALBOT. When from the Dauphin's crest thy sword struck
    It warm'd thy father's heart with proud desire
    And from the pride of Gallia rescued thee.
    From thee, my boy, and had the maidenhood
    Here purposing the Bastard to destroy,
    Came in strong rescue. Speak, thy father's care;
    Wilt thou yet leave the battle, boy, and fly,
    Now thou art seal'd the son of chivalry?
    By me they nothing gain an if I stay:
    'Tis but the short'ning of my life one day.
    In thee thy mother dies, our household's name,
    All these and more we hazard by thy stay;
    All these are sav'd if thou wilt fly away.
    And like me to the peasant boys of France,
    Surely, by all the glory you have won,
    If thou wilt fight, fight by thy father's side;
                      Another part of the field
  TALBOT. Where is my other life? Mine own is gone.
    Young Talbot's valour makes me smile at thee.
    Into the clust'ring battle of the French;
    His overmounting spirit; and there died,
         Enter soldiers, bearing the body of JOHN TALBOT
    Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky,
    Speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath!
    Brave Death by speaking, whether he will or no;
    Had Death been French, then Death had died to-day.
    Come, come, and lay him in his father's arms.
    My spirit can no longer bear these harms.
  BASTARD. How the young whelp of Talbot's, raging wood,
    To be the pillage of a giglot wench.'
    So, rushing in the bowels of the French,
    See where he lies inhearsed in the arms
    Of the most bloody nurser of his harms!
  BASTARD. Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunder,
    During the life, let us not wrong it dead.
  LUCY. Herald, conduct me to the Dauphin's tent,
    To know who hath obtain'd the glory of the day.
    And to survey the bodies of the dead.
  LUCY. But where's the great Alcides of the field,
    Knight of the noble order of Saint George,
    Worthy Saint Michael, and the Golden Fleece,
    Great Marshal to Henry the Sixth
    Of all his wars within the realm of France?
    Him that thou magnifi'st with all these tides,
  LUCY. Is Talbot slain-the Frenchmen's only scourge,
    That I in rage might shoot them at your faces!
    O that I could but can these dead to life!
    It were enough to fright the realm of France.
    It would amaze the proudest of you all.
    Give me their bodies, that I may bear them hence
    And give them burial as beseems their worth.
    For God's sake, let him have them; to keep them here,
    They would but stink, and putrefy the air.
  CHARLES. Go, take their bodies hence.
  LUCY. I'll bear them hence; but from their ashes shall be
  CHARLES. So we be rid of them, do with them what thou
Sennet. Enter the KING, GLOUCESTER, and EXETER
  KING HENRY. Have you perus'd the letters from the Pope,
    The Emperor, and the Earl of Armagnac?
  GLOUCESTER. I have, my lord; and their intent is this:
    Between the realms of England and of France.
  KING HENRY. How doth your Grace affect their motion?
  GLOUCESTER. Well, my good lord, and as the only means
  GLOUCESTER. Beside, my lord, the sooner to effect
    So let them have their answers every one.
        BEAUFORT, the PAPAL LEGATE, and two AMBASSADORS
    Henry the Fifth did sometime prophesy:
    He'll make his cap co-equal with the crown.'
    And therefore are we certainly resolv'd
  GLOUCESTER. And for the proffer of my lord your master,
    As, liking of the lady's virtuous gifts,
    Her beauty, and the value of her dower,
    And so, my Lord Protector, see them guarded
    Commit them to the fortune of the sea.
                        Exeunt all but WINCHESTER and the LEGATE
    For clothing me in these grave ornaments.
    Or be inferior to the proudest peer.
    That neither in birth or for authority
    The Bishop will be overborne by thee.
    I'll either make thee stoop and bend thy knee,
    'Tis said the stout Parisians do revolt
    And turn again unto the warlike French.
  PUCELLE. Peace be amongst them, if they turn to us;
    Else ruin combat with their palaces!
  CHARLES. What tidings send our scouts? I prithee speak.
  CHARLES. Somewhat too sudden, sirs, the warning is;
    But we will presently provide for them.
  BURGUNDY. I trust the ghost of Talbot is not there.
    Command the conquest, Charles, it shall be thine,
    Let Henry fret and all the world repine.
  PUCELLE. The Regent conquers and the Frenchmen fly.
    Under the lordly monarch of the north,
    Out of the powerful regions under earth,
    Help me this once, that France may get the field.
    In earnest of a further benefit,
                                         [They hang their heads]
                                        [They shake their heads]
    Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?
    Before that England give the French the foil.
    See! they forsake me. Now the time is come
    Now, France, thy glory droopeth to the dust.            Exit
    And try if they can gain your liberty.
    A goodly prize, fit for the devil's grace!
    See how the ugly witch doth bend her brows
  YORK. O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man:
  PUCELLE. A plaguing mischief fight on Charles and thee!
  PUCELLE. I prithee give me leave to curse awhile.
  YORK. Curse, miscreant, when thou comest to the stake.
    For I will touch thee but with reverent hands;
    I kiss these fingers for eternal peace,
    And lay them gently on thy tender side.
    Who art thou? Say, that I may honour thee.
    So doth the swan her downy cygnets save,
    Keeping them prisoner underneath her wings.
    As plays the sun upon the glassy streams,
    Twinkling another counterfeited beam,
    Confounds the tongue and makes the senses rough.
  SUFFOLK.  [Aside]  She's beautiful, and therefore to be woo'd;
    She is a woman, therefore to be won.
  SUFFOLK.  [Aside]  There all is marr'd; there lies a cooling
  MARGARET. He talks at random; sure, the man is mad.
    And peace established between these realms.
    But there remains a scruple in that too;
    For though her father be the King of Naples,
    And our nobility will scorn the match.
  SUFFOLK.  [Aside]  It shall be so, disdain they ne'er so much.
  MARGARET.  [Aside]  Perhaps I shall be rescu'd by the French;
    And then I need not crave his courtesy.
  SUFFOLK. I'll undertake to make thee Henry's queen,
    And have no portion in the choice myself.
  MARGARET. An if my father please, I am content.
    And, madam, at your father's castle walls
           Sound a parley. Enter REIGNIER on the walls
  SUFFOLK. Yes, there is remedy enough, my lord.
    Whom I with pain have woo'd and won thereto;
    To give thee answer of thy just demand.
                                    Exit REIGNIER from the walls
    To be the princely bride of such a lord,
    Enjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou,
    Free from oppression or the stroke of war,
    Give thee her hand for sign of plighted faith.
  SUFFOLK. Reignier of France, I give thee kingly thanks,
    I'll over then to England with this news,
  REIGNIER. I do embrace thee as I would embrace
    Never yet taint with love, I send the King.
    Bethink thee on her virtues that surmount,
    Repeat their semblance often on the seas,
                  Camp of the DUKE OF YORK in Anjou
                   Enter YORK, WARWICK, and others
  SHEPHERD. Ah, Joan, this kills thy father's heart outright!
    And, now it is my chance to find thee out,
    Ah, Joan, sweet daughter Joan, I'll die with thee!
    Thou art no father nor no friend of mine.
    I did beget her, all the parish knows.
    Her mother liveth yet, can testify
    She was the first fruit of my bach'lorship.
    Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Joan.
  SHEPHERD. 'Tis true, I gave a noble to the priest
    The morn that I was wedded to her mother.
    Wilt thou not stoop? Now cursed be the time
    Of thy nativity. I would the milk
    Thy mother gave thee when thou suck'dst her breast
    I wish some ravenous wolf had eaten thee.
    Dost thou deny thy father, cursed drab?
    To fill the world with vicious qualities.
    But issued from the progeny of kings;
    Stain'd with the guiltless blood of innocents,
    Because you want the grace that others have,
    Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.
    Spare for no fagots, let there be enow.
    Place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake,
    Murder not then the fruit within my womb,
  YORK. She and the Dauphin have been juggling.
    Especially since Charles must father it.
    'Twas neither Charles nor yet the Duke I nam'd,
    Strumpet, thy words condemn thy brat and thee.
    Upon the country where you make abode;
    But darkness and the gloomy shade of death
    With letters of commission from the King.
    For know, my lords, the states of Christendom,
    Mov'd with remorse of these outrageous broils,
    Betwixt our nation and the aspiring French;
    And here at hand the Dauphin and his train
    After the slaughter of so many peers,
    And sold their bodies for their country's benefit,
    Have we not lost most part of all the towns,
    The utter loss of all the realm of France.
    As little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.
        Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, BASTARD, REIGNIER, and others
    What the conditions of that league must be.
    By sight of these our baleful enemies.
  CARDINAL. Charles, and the rest, it is enacted thus:
    An suffer you to breathe in fruitful peace,
  ALENCON. Must he be then as shadow of himself?
    With more than half the Gallian territories,
    And therein reverenc'd for their lawful king.
    Shall I, for lucre of the rest unvanquish'd,
    As to be call'd but viceroy of the whole?
    No, Lord Ambassador; I'll rather keep
    And now the matter grows to compromise
    Either accept the title thou usurp'st,
    Or we will plague thee with incessant wars.
    To cavil in the course of this contract.
  ALENCON.  [To CHARLES]  To say the truth, it is your policy
    And therefore take this compact of a truce,
    Nor be rebellious to the crown of England
    Thou, nor thy nobles, to the crown of England.
                    [CHARLES and the rest give tokens of fealty]
            Enter SUFFOLK, in conference with the KING,
    Provokes the mightiest hulk against the tide,
    Either to suffer shipwreck or arrive
    Had I sufficient skill to utter them,
  KING HENRY. And otherwise will Henry ne'er presume.
    Unto another lady of esteem.
    How shall we then dispense with that contract,
    To try his strength, forsaketh yet the lists
    And therefore may be broke without offence.
    Her father is no better than an earl,
  SUFFOLK. Yes, my lord, her father is a king,
    And keep the Frenchmen in allegiance.
  GLOUCESTER. And so the Earl of Armagnac may do,
    So worthless peasants bargain for their wives,
    And therefore, lords, since he affects her most,
    It most of all these reasons bindeth us
    Whereas the contrary bringeth bliss,
  KING HENRY. Whether it be through force of your report,
    Take therefore shipping; post, my lord, to France;
    To cross the seas to England, and be crown'd
    Among the people gather up a tenth.
    As did the youthful Paris once to Greece,
    With hope to find the like event in love
    But prosper better than the Troyan did.
    Margaret shall now be Queen, and rule the King;
    But I will rule both her, the King, and realm.          Exit
  CARDINAL BEAUFORT, BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, great-uncle to the King
  WILLIAM STAFFORD, his brother
Flourish of trumpets; then hautboys. Enter the KING, DUKE HUMPHREY
OF GLOUCESTER, SALISBURY, WARWICK, and CARDINAL BEAUFORT, on the one side;
the QUEEN, SUFFOLK, YORK, SOMERSET, and BUCKINGHAM, on the other
    So, in the famous ancient city Tours,
    In presence of the Kings of France and Sicil,
    Deliver up my title in the Queen
    To your most gracious hands, that are the substance
    Makes me the bolder to salute my king
    Such is the fulness of my heart's content.
    Here are the articles of contracted peace
    Between our sovereign and the French King Charles,
  GLOUCESTER. [Reads] 'Imprimis: It is agreed between the French King
    for Henry King of England, that the said Henry shall espouse the
    and Jerusalem, and crown her Queen of England ere the thirtieth
      Item: That the duchy of Anjou and the county of Maine shall be
    released and delivered to the King her father'-
                                           [Lets the paper fall]
    Some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heart,
    And dimm'd mine eyes, that I can read no further.
  CARDINAL. [Reads] 'Item: It is further agreed between them that the
    to the King her father, and she sent over of the King of
    We here create thee the first Duke of Suffolk,
    And girt thee with the sword. Cousin of York,
  GLOUCESTER. Brave peers of England, pillars of the state,
    Your grief, the common grief of all the land.
    What! did my brother Henry spend his youth,
    His valour, coin, and people, in the wars?
    And did my brother Bedford toil his wits
    With all the learned Council of the realm,
    Studied so long, sat in the Council House
    And shall these labours and these honours die?
    Razing the characters of your renown,
    Suffolk, the new-made duke that rules the roast,
    Hath given the duchy of Anjou and Maine
    Unto the poor King Reignier, whose large style
    Agrees not with the leanness of his purse.
  SALISBURY. Now, by the death of Him that died for all,
    These counties were the keys of Normandy!
  WARWICK. For grief that they are past recovery;
    For were there hope to conquer them again
    Anjou and Maine! myself did win them both;
    Those provinces these arms of mine did conquer;
    And are the cities that I got with wounds
    That dims the honour of this warlike isle!
    Large sums of gold and dowries with their wives;
    It was the pleasure of my lord the King.
  CARDINAL. So, there goes our Protector in a rage.
    And no great friend, I fear me, to the King.
    Consider, lords, he is the next of blood
    And heir apparent to the English crown.
    And all the wealthy kingdoms of the west,
    What though the common people favour him,
    Calling him 'Humphrey, the good Duke of Gloucester,'
    Clapping their hands, and crying with loud voice
    With 'God preserve the good Duke Humphrey!'
  BUCKINGHAM. Why should he then protect our sovereign,
    And all together, with the Duke of Suffolk,
    I'll to the Duke of Suffolk presently.                  Exit
    Yet let us watch the haughty cardinal;
    Than all the princes in the land beside;
    Despite Duke Humphrey or the Cardinal.
    While these do labour for their own preferment,
    Behoves it us to labour for the realm.
    Oft have I seen the haughty Cardinal-
    Unlike the ruler of a commonweal.
    Warwick my son, the comfort of my age,
    Hath won the greatest favour of the commons,
    And, brother York, thy acts in Ireland,
    In bringing them to civil discipline,
    Thy late exploits done in the heart of France
    Have made thee fear'd and honour'd of the people:
    Join we together for the public good,
    The pride of Suffolk and the Cardinal,
    While they do tend the profit of the land.
  WARWICK. So God help Warwick, as he loves the land
  SALISBURY. Then let's make haste away and look unto the main.
  WARWICK. Unto the main! O father, Maine is lost-
    Main chance, father, you meant; but I meant Maine,
  YORK. Anjou and Maine are given to the French;
    Paris is lost; the state of Normandy
    Stands on a tickle point now they are gone.
    Suffolk concluded on the articles;
    I cannot blame them all: what is't to them?
    'Tis thine they give away, and not their own.
    Pirates may make cheap pennyworths of their pillage,
    While as the silly owner of the goods
    Weeps over them and wrings his hapless hands
    Methinks the realms of England, France, and Ireland,
    As did the fatal brand Althaea burnt
    Unto the prince's heart of Calydon.
    Anjou and Maine both given unto the French!
    And therefore I will take the Nevils' parts,
    And when I spy advantage, claim the crown,
    For that's the golden mark I seek to hit.
    Nor hold the sceptre in his childish fist,
    Nor wear the diadem upon his head,
    Watch thou and wake, when others be asleep,
    To pry into the secrets of the state;
    And Humphrey with the peers be fall'n at jars;
    Then will I raise aloft the milk-white rose,
    With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfum'd,
    And in my standard bear the arms of York,
    To grapple with the house of Lancaster;
    And force perforce I'll make him yield the crown,
    Hanging the head at Ceres' plenteous load?
    Why doth the great Duke Humphrey knit his brows,
    As frowning at the favours of the world?
    Why are thine eyes fix'd to the sullen earth,
    What see'st thou there? King Henry's diadem,
    Enchas'd with all the honours of the world?
    Until thy head be circled with the same.
    Put forth thy hand, reach at the glorious gold.
    What, is't too short? I'll lengthen it with mine;
    And having both together heav'd it up,
    We'll both together lift our heads to heaven,
    As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.
    Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts!
    And on the pieces of the broken wand
    Were plac'd the heads of Edmund Duke of Somerset
    In the cathedral church of Westminster,
    And on my head did set the diadem.
  GLOUCESTER. Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright.
    Art thou not second woman in the realm,
    And the Protector's wife, belov'd of him?
    Above the reach or compass of thy thought?
    Where as the King and Queen do mean to hawk.
    I would remove these tedious stumbling-blocks
    And smooth my way upon their headless necks;
    Where are you there, Sir John? Nay, fear not, man,
    We are alone; here's none but thee and I.
  HUME. But, by the grace of God and Hume's advice,
    With Margery Jourdain, the cunning witch of Eie,
    With Roger Bolingbroke, the conjurer?
    And will they undertake to do me good?
  HUME. This they have promised, to show your Highness
  DUCHESS. It is enough; I'll think upon the questions;
    We'll see these things effected to the full.
  HUME. Hume must make merry with the Duchess' gold;
    Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch:
    Yet have I gold flies from another coast-
    I dare not say from the rich Cardinal,
    And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk;
    Have hired me to undermine the Duchess,
    And buzz these conjurations in her brain.
    Yet am I Suffolk and the Cardinal's broker.
    To call them both a pair of crafty knaves.
    Hume's knavery will be the Duchess' wreck,
Enter three or four PETITIONERS, PETER, the Armourer's man, being one
    will come this way by and by, and then we may deliver our
    supplications in the quill.
  SECOND PETITIONER. Marry, the Lord protect him, for he's a good
  FIRST PETITIONER. Here 'a comes, methinks, and the Queen with him.
    I'll be the first, sure.
  SECOND PETITIONER. Come back, fool; this is the Duke of Suffolk and
    his lordship? Let me see them. What is thine?
    What's here! [Reads] 'Against the Duke of Suffolk, for enclosing
    the commons of Melford.' How now, sir knave!
    for saying that the Duke of York was rightful heir to the crown.
  QUEEN. What say'st thou? Did the Duke of York say he was rightful
    heir to the crown?
    was, and that the King was an usurper.
  SUFFOLK. Who is there? [Enter servant] Take this fellow in, and
    of your matter before the King.
    Under the wings of our Protector's grace,
                                       [Tears the supplications]
    Away, base cullions! Suffolk, let them go.
  QUEEN. My Lord of Suffolk, say, is this the guise,
    Is this the fashions in the court of England?
    Is this the government of Britain's isle,
    And this the royalty of Albion's king?
    Under the surly Gloucester's governance?
    I tell thee, Pole, when in the city Tours
    And stol'st away the ladies' hearts of France,
    I thought King Henry had resembled thee
    His champions are the prophets and apostles;
    I would the college of the Cardinals
    And set the triple crown upon his head;
  QUEEN. Beside the haughty Protector, have we Beaufort
    And grumbling York; and not the least of these
    But can do more in England than the King.
  SUFFOLK. And he of these that can do most of all
    Cannot do more in England than the Nevils;
  QUEEN. Not all these lords do vex me half so much
    As that proud dame, the Lord Protector's wife.
    She sweeps it through the court with troops of ladies,
    Strangers in court do take her for the Queen.
    She vaunted 'mongst her minions t' other day
    Was better worth than all my father's lands,
    That she will light to listen to the lays,
    Although we fancy not the Cardinal,
    Yet must we join with him and with the lords,
    As for the Duke of York, this late complaint
    So one by one we'll weed them all at last,
    And you yourself shall steer the happy helm.
          Sound a sennet. Enter the KING, DUKE HUMPHREY,
              WARWICK, and the DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER
    Then let him be denay'd the regentship.
  SOMERSET. If Somerset be unworthy of the place,
  WARWICK. Whether your Grace be worthy, yea or no,
    Dispute not that; York is the worthier.
  WARWICK. The Cardinal's not my better in the field.
  WARWICK. Warwick may live to be the best of all.
  QUEEN. Because the King, forsooth, will have it so.
  GLOUCESTER. Madam, the King is old enough himself
  GLOUCESTER. Madam, I am Protector of the realm;
  SUFFOLK. Resign it then, and leave thine insolence.
    The Dauphin hath prevail'd beyond the seas,
    And all the peers and nobles of the realm
  CARDINAL. The commons hast thou rack'd; the clergy's bags
    And left thee to the mercy of the law.
    If they were known, as the suspect is great,
    Would make thee quickly hop without thy head.
                        [She gives the DUCHESS a box on the ear]
    She'll hamper thee and dandle thee like a baby.
    With walking once about the quadrangle,
    Prove them, and I lie open to the law;
    But to the matter that we have in hand:
    To be your Regent in the realm of France.
  YORK. I'll tell thee, Suffolk, why I am unmeet:
    First, for I cannot flatter thee in pride;
    Next, if I be appointed for the place,
    Till France be won into the Dauphin's hands.
    Did never traitor in the land commit.
        Enter HORNER, the Armourer, and his man PETER, guarded
    Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself!
  KING HENRY. What mean'st thou, Suffolk? Tell me, what are these?
  SUFFOLK. Please it your Majesty, this is the man
    His words were these: that Richard Duke of York
    Was rightful heir unto the English crown,
  KING HENRY. Say, man, were these thy words?
    any such matter. God is my witness, I am falsely accus'd by the
  PETER. [Holding up his hands] By these ten bones, my lords, he did
    speak them to me in the garret one night, as we were scouring my
    Let him have all the rigour of the law.
  HORNER`. Alas, my lord, hang me if ever I spake the words. My
    the other day, he did vow upon his knees he would be even with
    me. I have good witness of this; therefore I beseech your
    Let Somerset be Regent o'er the French,
    And let these have a day appointed them
    This is the law, and this Duke Humphrey's doom.
  HORNER. And I accept the combat willingly.
  KING HENRY. Away with them to prison; and the day of combat shall
    be the last of the next month.
    Come, Somerset, we'll see thee sent away.   Flourish. Exeunt
Enter MARGERY JOURDAIN, the witch; the two priests, HUME and SOUTHWELL;
  HUME. Come, my masters; the Duchess, I tell you, expects
  BOLINGBROKE. Master Hume, we are therefore provided; will her
    in God's name, and leave us. [Exit HUME] Mother Jourdain, be you
    prostrate and grovel on the earth; John Southwell, read you; and
  DUCHESS. Well said, my masters; and welcome all. To this gear, the
    sooner the better.
  BOLINGBROKE. Patience, good lady; wizards know their times:
    Deep night, dark night, the silent of the night,
    And spirits walk and ghosts break up their graves-
    That time best fits the work we have in hand.
     [Here they do the ceremonies belonging, and make the circle;
     It thunders and lightens terribly; then the SPIRIT riseth]
    By the eternal God, whose name and power
  BOLINGBROKE. [Reads] 'First of the king: what shall of him become?'
             [As the SPIRIT speaks, SOUTHWELL writes the answer]
  BOLINGBROKE. 'What fates await the Duke of Suffolk?'
  BOLINGBROKE. 'What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?'
    Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
  BOLINGBROKE. Descend to darkness and the burning lake;
               Enter the DUKE OF YORK and the DUKE OF
  YORK. Lay hands upon these traitors and their trash.
    What, madam, are you there? The King and commonweal
    See you well guerdon'd for these good deserts.
    Away with them! let them be clapp'd up close,
    Stafford, take her to thee.
    Now, pray, my lord, let's see the devil's writ.
    Well, to the rest:
    'Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk?'
    'What shall betide the Duke of Somerset?'
    Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
    With him the husband of this lovely lady;
    Thither go these news as fast as horse can carry them-
    To be the post, in hope of his reward.
    Who's within there, ho?
Enter the KING, QUEEN, GLOUCESTER, CARDINAL, and SUFFOLK,
  QUEEN. Believe me, lords, for flying at the brook,
    I saw not better sport these seven years' day;
    Yet, by your leave, the wind was very high,
    And what a pitch she flew above the rest!
    They know their master loves to be aloft,
  CARDINAL. I thought as much; he would be above the clouds.
    Beat on a crown, the treasure of thy heart;
  KING HENRY. I prithee, peace,
    Good Queen, and whet not on these furious peers;
    For blessed are the peacemakers on earth.
  CARDINAL. Let me be blessed for the peace I make
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside to CARDINAL] Make up no factious numbers for the
    This evening on the east side of the grove.
    Had not your man put up the fowl so suddenly,
    the grove?
    [Aside to CARDINAL] Now, by God's Mother, priest,
  SUFFOLK. Come to the King, and tell him what miracle.
           Enter the MAYOR OF SAINT ALBANS and his brethren,
  CARDINAL. Here comes the townsmen on procession
    To present your Highness with the man.
  GLOUCESTER. Stand by, my masters; bring him near the King;
  KING HENRY. Good fellow, tell us here the circumstance,
    That we for thee may glorify the Lord.
  GLOUCESTER. Hadst thou been his mother, thou couldst have better
  SIMPCOX. At Berwick in the north, an't like your Grace.
  KING HENRY. Poor soul, God's goodness hath been great to thee.
    But still remember what the Lord hath done.
    Come, offer at my shrine, and I will help thee.'
    Let me see thine eyes; wink now; now open them;
  KING HENRY. Why, then, thou know'st what colour jet is of?
  GLOUCESTER. Then, Saunder, sit there, the lying'st knave in
    have known all our names as thus to name the several colours we
    nominate them all, it is impossible. My lords, Saint Alban here
  MAYOR. Sirrah, go fetch the beadle hither straight.
  GLOUCESTER. Now fetch me a stool hither by and by. [A stool
           After the BEADLE hath hit him once, he leaps over
           the stool and runs away; and they follow and cry
  QUEEN. It made me laugh to see the villain run.
  GLOUCESTER. Follow the knave, and take this drab away.
  GLOUCESTER. Let them be whipp'd through every market town till they
    come to Berwick, from whence they came.
  SUFFOLK. True; made the lame to leap and fly away.
    Under the countenance and confederacy
    Of Lady Eleanor, the Protector's wife,
    Whom we have apprehended in the fact,
    And other of your Highness' Privy Council,
    And, vanquish'd as I am, I yield to the
    Or to the meanest groom.
  KING HENRY. O God, what mischiefs work the wicked ones,
    Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby!
  QUEEN. Gloucester, see here the tainture of thy nest;
    And call these foul offenders to their answers,
    And poise the cause in justice' equal scales,
    Edward the Third, my lords, had seven sons;
    The first, Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Wales;
    The second, William of Hatfield; and the third,
    Was John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster;
    William of Windsor was the seventh and last.
    Edward the Black Prince died before his father
    Who, after Edward the Third's death, reign'd as king
    Crown'd by the name of Henry the Fourth,
    Seiz'd on the realm, depos'd the rightful king,
  WARWICK. Father, the Duke hath told the truth;
    Thus got the house of Lancaster the crown.
  YORK. Which now they hold by force, and not by right;
    For Richard, the first son's heir, being dead,
    The issue of the next son should have reign'd.
    I claim the crown, had issue Philippe, a daughter,
  SALISBURY. This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke,
    As I have read, laid claim unto the crown;
    But, to the rest.
    My mother, being heir unto the crown,
    To Edmund Langley, Edward the Third's fifth son, son.
    By her I claim the kingdom: she was heir
    To Roger Earl of March, who was the son
    So, if the issue of the elder son
    Succeed before the younger, I am King.
    Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt,
    The fourth son: York claims it from the third.
    It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee
    Then, father Salisbury, kneel we together,
    And in this private plot be we the first
    With honour of his birthright to the crown.
    With heart-blood of the house of Lancaster;
    Do you as I do in these dangerous days:
    Wink at the Duke of Suffolk's insolence,
    At Buckingham, and all the crew of them,
    Till they have snar'd the shepherd of the flock,
    That virtuous prince, the good Duke Humphrey;
    'Tis that they seek; and they, in seeking that,
    Shall find their deaths, if York can prophesy.
  WARWICK. My heart assures me that the Earl of Warwick
    Shall one day make the Duke of York a king.
    Richard shall live to make the Earl of Warwick
    The greatest man in England but the King.             Exeunt
Sound trumpets. Enter the KING and State: the QUEEN, GLOUCESTER, YORK,
SUFFOLK, and SALISBURY, with guard, to banish the DUCHESS. Enter, guarded,
the DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER, MARGERY JOURDAIN, HUME, SOUTHWELL, and BOLINGBROKE
    Receive the sentence of the law for sins
    From thence unto the place of execution:
    And you three shall be strangled on the gallows.
    With Sir John Stanley in the Isle of Man.
  GLOUCESTER. Eleanor, the law, thou seest, hath judged thee.
    I cannot justify whom the law condemns.
             Exeunt the DUCHESS and the other prisoners, guarded
    Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground!
    Give up your staff, sir, and the King his realm.
    As willingly do I the same resign
    As ere thy father Henry made it mine;
    As others would ambitiously receive it.
    This staff of honour raught, there let it stand
    This is the day appointed for the combat;
    And ready are the appellant and defendant,
    The armourer and his man, to enter the lists,
    So please your Highness to behold the fight.
  QUEEN. Ay, good my lord; for purposely therefore
    Left I the court, to see this quarrel tried.
  KING HENRY. A God's name, see the lists and all things fit;
    Here let them end it, and God defend the right!
    Or more afraid to fight, than is the appellant,
        Enter at one door, HORNER, the Armourer, and his
       his staff with a sand-bag fastened to it; and at the
        other door PETER, his man, with a drum and sandbag,
  FIRST PRENTICE. Here, Peter, I drink to thee; and be not afraid.
    for credit of the prentices.
    if I die, I give thee my apron; and, Will, thou shalt have my
    hammer; and here, Tom, take all the money that I have. O Lord
  HORNER. Masters, I am come hither, as it were, upon my man's
    touching the Duke of York, I will take my death I never meant him
    any ill, nor the King, nor the Queen; and therefore, Peter, have
    at thee with a down right blow!
    Sound, trumpets, alarum to the combatants!
  YORK. Take away his weapon. Fellow, thank God, and the good wine in
  GLOUCESTER. Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud,
  GLOUCESTER. Ten is the hour that was appointed me
    To watch the coming of my punish'd duchess.
    Uneath may she endure the flinty streets
    To tread them with her tender-feeling feet.
    When thou didst ride in triumph through the streets.
          Enter the DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER in a white sheet,
               STANLEY, the SHERIFF, and OFFICERS
  SERVING-MAN. So please your Grace, we'll take her from the sheriff.
    Now thou dost penance too. Look how they gaze!
    See how the giddy multitude do point
    And nod their heads and throw their eyes on thee;
    Ah, Gloucester, hide thee from their hateful looks,
    And when I start, the envious people laugh
    Trowest thou that e'er I'll look upon the world
    Or count them happy that enjoy the sun?
    And he a prince, and ruler of the land;
    Nor stir at nothing till the axe of death
    Hang over thee, as sure it shortly will.
    With her that hateth thee and hates us all-
    And, fly thou how thou canst, they'll tangle thee.
    And each of them had twenty times their power,
    All these could not procure me any scathe
    Wouldst have me rescue thee from this reproach?
    But I in danger for the breach of law.
    I pray thee sort thy heart to patience;
    Holden at Bury the first of this next month.
    This is close dealing. Well, I will be there.    Exit HERALD
    Let not her penance exceed the King's commission.
    To take her with him to the Isle of Man.
  GLOUCESTER. Entreat her not the worse in that I pray
    You use her well; the world may laugh again,
  DUCHESS. Art thou gone too? All comfort go with thee!
    Stanley, I prithee go, and take me hence;
    I care not whither, for I beg no favour,
  STANLEY. Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man,
    And shall I then be us'd reproachfully?
    Go, lead the way; I long to see my prison.            Exeunt
Sound a sennet. Enter the KING, the QUEEN, CARDINAL, SUFFOLK, YORK,
BUCKINGHAM, SALISBURY, and WARWICK, to the Parliament
    'Tis not his wont to be the hindmost man,
    We know the time since he was mild and affable,
    That all the court admir'd him for submission.
    But meet him now and be it in the morn,
    When every one will give the time of day,
    Small curs are not regarded when they grin,
    But great men tremble when the lion roars,
    And should you fall he is the next will mount;
    Me seemeth, then, it is no policy-
    By flattery hath he won the commons' hearts;
    'Tis to be fear'd they all will follow him.
    Now 'tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted;
    Suffer them now, and they'll o'ergrow the garden
    And choke the herbs for want of husbandry.
    Made me collect these dangers in the Duke.
    I will subscribe, and say I wrong'd the Duke.
    As next the King he was successive heir-
    Did instigate the bedlam brainsick Duchess
    Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep,
    The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb.
    Levy great sums of money through the realm
    By means whereof the towns each day revolted.
  BUCKINGHAM. Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown
  KING HENRY. My lords, at once: the care you have of us,
    As is the sucking lamb or harmless dove:
    Seems he a dove? His feathers are but borrow'd,
    For he's disposed as the hateful raven.
    For he's inclin'd as is the ravenous wolf.
    Take heed, my lord; the welfare of us all
    Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.
    Thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud,
  GLOUCESTER. All happiness unto my lord the King!
    I do arrest thee of high treason here.
    And, being Protector, stay'd the soldiers' pay;
  GLOUCESTER. Is it but thought so? What are they that think it?
    I never robb'd the soldiers of their pay
    So help me God, as I have watch'd the night-
    That doit that e'er I wrested from the King,
    Because I would not tax the needy commons,
    Have I dispursed to the garrisons,
    Pity was all the fault that was in me;
    And lowly words were ransom for their fault.
    I never gave them condign punishment.
    Above the felon or what trespass else.
  SUFFOLK. My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answer'd;
    To keep until your further time of trial.
  GLOUCESTER. Ah, gracious lord, these days are dangerous!
    I know their complot is to have my life;
    And prove the period of their tyranny,
    But mine is made the prologue to their play;
    Will not conclude their plotted tragedy.
    And dogged York, that reaches at the moon,
    And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest,
    Ay, all of you have laid your heads together-
    And the offender granted scope of speech,
    'Twill make them cool in zeal unto your Grace.
  QUEEN. But I can give the loser leave to chide.
    Beshrew the winners, for they play'd me false!
  BUCKINGHAM. He'll wrest the sense, and hold us here all day.
  CARDINAL. Sirs, take away the Duke, and guard him sure.
    Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side,
    And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.
  QUEEN. What, will your Highness leave the Parliament?
    And yet, good Humphrey, is the hour to come
    That e'er I prov'd thee false or fear'd thy faith.
    That these great lords, and Margaret our Queen,
    Thou never didst them wrong, nor no man wrong;
    And as the butcher takes away the calf,
    And binds the wretch, and beats it when it strays,
    Bearing it to the bloody slaughter-house,
    Even so, remorseless, have they borne him hence;
    And as the dam runs lowing up and down,
    Looking the way her harmless young one went,
  QUEEN. Free lords, cold snow melts with the sun's hot beams:
    Beguiles him as the mournful crocodile
    Or as the snake, roll'd in a flow'ring bank,
    That for the beauty thinks it excellent.
    This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world
    To rid us from the fear we have of him.
    To guard the chicken from a hungry kite
    As place Duke Humphrey for the King's Protector?
  QUEEN. So the poor chicken should be sure of death.
  SUFFOLK. Madam, 'tis true; and were't not madness then
    To make the fox surveyor of the fold?
    By nature prov'd an enemy to the flock,
    Seeing the deed is meritorious,
    Say but the word, and I will be his priest.
    Say you consent and censure well the deed,
    I tender so the safety of my liege.
  SUFFOLK. Here is my hand the deed is worthy doing.
    To signify that rebels there are up
    And put the Englishmen unto the sword.
    Send succours, lords, and stop the rage betime,
    Before the wound do grow uncurable;
    For, being green, there is great hope of help.
  YORK. That Somerset be sent as Regent thither;
    Witness the fortune he hath had in France.
    Had been the Regent there instead of me,
    I rather would have lost my life betimes
    By staying there so long till all were lost.
  QUEEN. Nay then, this spark will prove a raging fire,
    Thy fortune, York, hadst thou been Regent there,
  YORK. What, worse than nought? Nay, then a shame take all!
  SOMERSET. And in the number, thee that wishest shame!
    And try your hap against the Irishmen?
    But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey.
    And so break off; the day is almost spent.
    For there I'll ship them all for Ireland.
    Let pale-fac'd fear keep with the mean-born man
    My brain, more busy than the labouring spider,
    I fear me you but warm the starved snake,
    'Twas men I lack'd, and you will give them me;
    Until the golden circuit on my head,
    Like to the glorious sun's transparent beams,
    Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw.
    Under the tide of John Mortimer.
    And in the end being rescu'd, I have seen
    Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells.
    Hath he conversed with the enemy,
    And given me notice of their villainies.
    By this I shall perceive the commons' mind,
    How they affect the house and claim of York.
    I know no pain they can inflict upon him
    Why, then from Ireland come I with my strength,
    And reap the harvest which that rascal sow'd;
    And Henry put apart, the next for me.                   Exit
Enter two or three MURDERERS running over the stage,
from the murder of DUKE HUMPHREY
    We have dispatch'd the Duke, as he commanded.
    The King and all the peers are here at hand.
    Have you laid fair the bed? Is all things well,
             Sound trumpets. Enter the KING, the QUEEN,
  KING HENRY. I thank thee, Meg; these words content me much.
    Where is our uncle? What's the matter, Suffolk?
  SOMERSET. Rear up his body; wring him by the nose.
    And thinks he that the chirping of a wren,
    Can chase away the first conceived sound?
    Sits in grim majesty to fright the world.
    And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight;
    For in the shade of death I shall find joy-
    Although the Duke was enemy to him,
    And all to have the noble Duke alive.
    What know I how the world may deem of me?
    It may be judg'd I made the Duke away;
    What, art thou like the adder waxen deaf?
    Why, then Dame Margaret was ne'er thy joy.
    Was I for this nigh wreck'd upon the sea,
    What did I then but curs'd the gentle gusts,
    And he that loos'd them forth their brazen caves;
    And bid them blow towards England's blessed shore,
    But left that hateful office unto thee.
    The splitting rocks cow'r'd in the sinking sands
    And would not dash me with their ragged sides,
    Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they,
    When from thy shore the tempest beat us back,
    I stood upon the hatches in the storm;
    And when the dusky sky began to rob
    And call'd them blind and dusky spectacles
    His father's acts commenc'd in burning Troy!
    By Suffolk and the Cardinal Beaufort's means.
    That want their leader, scatter up and down
    And care not who they sting in his revenge.
    Myself have calm'd their spleenful mutiny
    Until they hear the order of his death.
    And comment then upon his sudden death.
    With the rude multitude till I return.                  Exit
                                   Exit SALISBURY with the commons
    But all in vain are these mean obsequies;
               Bed put forth with the body. Enter WARWICK
  WARWICK. Come hither, gracious sovereign, view this body.
    To free us from his Father's wrathful curse,
    Upon the life of this thrice-famed Duke.
  WARWICK. See how the blood is settled in his face.
    Being all descended to the labouring heart,
    Who, in the conflict that it holds with death,
    Attracts the same for aidance 'gainst the enemy,
    Which with the heart there cools, and ne'er returneth
    To blush and beautify the cheek again.
    His eye-balls further out than when he liv'd,
    Look, on the sheets his hair, you see, is sticking;
    Like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged.
    The least of all these signs were probable.
  SUFFOLK. Why, Warwick, who should do the Duke to death?
    And you, forsooth, had the good Duke to keep.
  QUEEN. Then you, belike, suspect these noblemen
  WARWICK. Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh,
    But will suspect 'twas he that made the slaughter?
    Who finds the partridge in the puttock's nest
    But may imagine how the bird was dead,
    Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak?
  QUEEN. Are you the butcher, Suffolk? Where's your knife?
                           Exeunt CARDINAL, SOMERSET, and others
    Thy mother took into her blameful bed
    And never of the Nevils' noble race.
  WARWICK. But that the guilt of murder bucklers thee,
    And I should rob the deathsman of his fee,
    Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,
    Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech
    And say it was thy mother that thou meant'st,
    Give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell,
  WARWICK. Away even now, or I will drag thee hence.
    Unworthy though thou art, I'll cope with thee,
       Re-enter SUFFOLK and WARWICK, with their weapons drawn
  SUFFOLK. The trait'rous Warwick, with the men of Bury,
  SALISBURY. [To the Commons within] Sirs, stand apart, the King
    Dread lord, the commons send you word by me
    They say by him the good Duke Humphrey died;
    They say in him they fear your Highness' death;
    Makes them thus forward in his banishment.
    Were there a serpent seen with forked tongue
    The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal.
    And therefore do they cry, though you forbid,
    That they will guard you, whe'er you will or no,
  COMMONS. [Within] An answer from the King, my Lord of Salisbury!
  SUFFOLK. 'Tis like the commons, rude unpolish'd hinds,
    Could send such message to their sovereign;
    But all the honour Salisbury hath won
    Is that he was the lord ambassador
    Sent from a sort of tinkers to the King.
  COMMONS. [Within] An answer from the King, or we will all break in!
  KING HENRY. Go, Salisbury, and tell them all from me
    I thank them for their tender loving care;
    And had I not been cited so by them,
    Yet did I purpose as they do entreat;
    And therefore by His Majesty I swear,
    He shall not breathe infection in this air
    But three days longer, on the pain of death.
    I have great matters to impart to thee.
    There's two of you; the devil make a third,
  SUFFOLK. Cease, gentle Queen, these execrations,
  SUFFOLK. A plague upon them! Wherefore should I curse them?
    Would curses kill as doth the mandrake's groan,
    Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint,
    Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink!
    Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste!
    Their music frightful as the serpent's hiss,
    And boding screech-owls make the consort full!
    all the foul terrors in dark-seated hell-
    And these dread curses, like the sun 'gainst glass,
    And turns the force of them upon thyself.
    Now, by the ground that I am banish'd from,
  QUEEN. O, let me entreat thee cease! Give me thy hand,
    Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place
    That thou might'st think upon these by the seal,
    Through whom a thousand sighs are breath'd for thee!
    So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief;
    I will repeal thee or, be well assur'd,
    And banished I am, if but from thee.
    Loather a hundred times to part than die.
    Yet now, farewell; and farewell life with thee!
    Once by the King and three times thrice by thee,
    'Tis not the land I care for, wert thou thence;
    For where thou art, there is the world itself,
    With every several pleasure in the world;
  QUEEN. Whither goes Vaux so fast? What news, I prithee?
    That makes him gasp, and stare, and catch the air,
    Were by his side; sometime he calls the King
  QUEEN. Go tell this heavy message to the King.       Exit VAUX
    Ay me! What is this world! What news are these!
    Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee,
    And with the southern clouds contend in tears-
    Theirs for the earth's increase, mine for my sorrows?
    Now get thee hence: the King, thou know'st, is coming;
  SUFFOLK. If I depart from thee I cannot live;
    Here could I breathe my soul into the air,
    As mild and gentle as the cradle-babe
    Dying with mother's dug between its lips;
    And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes,
    To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth;
    So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul,
    Or I should breathe it so into thy body,
    And then it liv'd in sweet Elysium.
    To die by thee were but to die in jest:
    From thee to die were torture more than death.
    To France, sweet Suffolk. Let me hear from thee;
    I'll have an Iris that shall find thee out.
  QUEEN. And take my heart with thee.           [She kisses him]
  SUFFOLK. A jewel, lock'd into the woefull'st cask
Enter the KING, SALISBURY, and WARWICK, to the CARDINAL in bed
  CARDINAL. If thou be'st Death I'll give thee England's treasure,
    Enough to purchase such another island,
  WARWICK. Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.
    Can I make men live, whe'er they will or no?
    He hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them.
    Give me some drink; and bid the apothecary
    Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.
  KING HENRY. O Thou eternal Mover of the heavens,
    O, beat away the busy meddling fiend
  WARWICK. See how the pangs of death do make him grin
    Close up his eyes, and draw the curtain close;
SUFFOLK and other GENTLEMEN, as prisoners
    Is crept into the bosom of the sea;
    And now loud-howling wolves arouse the jades
    That drag the tragic melancholy night;
    Who with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings
    Clip dead men's graves, and from their misty jaws
    Breathe foul contagious darkness in the air.
    Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize;
    For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs,
    Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,
    Or with their blood stain this discoloured shore.
    Master, this prisoner freely give I thee;
    The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share.
    And bear the name and port of gentlemen?
    Cut both the villains' throats- for die you shall;
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. I'll give it, sir: and therefore spare my life.
  WHITMORE. I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,
    [To SUFFOLK] And therefore, to revenge it, shalt thou die;
    And so should these, if I might have my will.
    Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded;
    But with our sword we wip'd away the blot;
    And I proclaim'd a coward through the world.
  SUFFOLK. Ay, but these rags are no part of the Duke:
    And thought thee happy when I shook my head?
    Fed from my trencher, kneel'd down at the board,
    Remember it, and let it make thee crestfall'n,
    And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.
  WHITMORE. Speak, Captain, shall I stab the forlorn swain?
    Troubles the silver spring where England drinks;
    For swallowing the treasure of the realm.
    Thy lips, that kiss'd the Queen, shall sweep the ground;
    Against the senseless winds shalt grin in vain,
    Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again;
    And wedded be thou to the hags of hell
    Unto the daughter of a worthless king,
    Having neither subject, wealth, nor diadem.
    With gobbets of thy mother's bleeding heart.
    By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France;
    The false revolting Normans thorough thee
    Hath slain their governors, surpris'd our forts,
    And sent the ragged soldiers wounded home.
    The princely Warwick, and the Nevils all,
    As hating thee, are rising up in arms;
    And now the house of York- thrust from the crown
    Under the which is writ 'Invitis nubibus.'
    Is crept into the palace of our King,
    And all by thee. Away! convey him hence.
    Upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges!
    Than Bargulus, the strong Illyrian pirate.
    I go of message from the Queen to France:
    I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.
  WHITMORE. Come, Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.
  SUFFOLK. Gelidus timor occupat artus: it is thee I fear.
  WHITMORE. Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.
    Far be it we should honour such as these
    With humble suit: no, rather let my head
    Stoop to the block than these knees bow to any
    Save to the God of heaven and to my king;
    Than stand uncover'd to the vulgar groom.
    Pompey the Great; and Suffolk dies by pirates.
  LIEUTENANT. And as for these, whose ransom we have set,
    It is our pleasure one of them depart;
                              Exeunt all but the FIRST GENTLEMAN
    Until the Queen his mistress bury it.                   Exit
    His body will I bear unto the King.
    So will the Queen, that living held him dear.
                                              Exit with the body
  GEORGE. Come and get thee a sword, though made of a lath; they have
    been up these two days.
  JOHN. They have the more need to sleep now, then.
  GEORGE. I tell thee Jack Cade the clothier means to dress the
  JOHN. The nobility think scorn to go in leather aprons.
  GEORGE. Nay, more, the King's Council are no good workmen.
    as much to say as 'Let the magistrates be labouring men'; and
    therefore should we be magistrates.
  GEORGE. Thou hast hit it; for there's no better sign of a brave
  JOHN. I see them! I see them! There's Best's son, the tanner of
  GEORGE. He shall have the skins of our enemies to make dog's
    leather of.
  JOHN. And Dick the butcher-
  JOHN. And Smith the weaver-
  GEORGE. Argo, their thread of life is spun.
  JOHN. Come, come, let's fall in with them.
  CADE. We John Cade, so term'd of our supposed father-
  DICK. [Aside] Or rather, of stealing a cade of herrings.
  CADE. For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired with the
  CADE. My father was a Mortimer-
  CADE. My mother a Plantagenet-
  CADE. My wife descended of the Lacies-
  DICK. [Aside] Ay, by my faith, the field is honourable, and there
    was he born, under a hedge, for his father had never a house but
    the cage.
    market days together.
  CADE. I fear neither sword nor fire.
  SMITH. [Aside] He need not fear the sword, for his coat is of
  CADE. Be brave, then, for your captain is brave, and vows
    sold for a penny; the three-hoop'd pot shall have ten hoops; and
    I will make it felony to drink small beer. All the realm shall be
  CADE. I thank you, good people- there shall be no money; all shall
    eat and drink on my score, and I will apparel them all in one
    livery, that they may agree like brothers and worship me their
  DICK. The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers.
    of the skin of an innocent lamb should be made parchment? That
    parchment, being scribbl'd o'er, should undo a man? Some say the
    bee stings; but I say 'tis the bee's wax; for I did but seal once
    there?
              Enter some, bringing in the CLERK OF CHATHAM
  CADE. Nay, then he is a conjurer.
  CADE. I am sorry for't; the man is a proper man, of mine honour;
    unless I find him guilty, he shall not die. Come hither, sirrah,
    I must examine thee. What is thy name?
  DICK. They use to write it on the top of letters; 'twill go hard
    his neck.                            Exit one with the CLERK
  MICHAEL. Fly, fly, fly! Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother are
    hard by, with the King's forces.
  CADE. Stand, villain, stand, or I'll fell thee down. He shall be
                  his brother, with drum and soldiers
  STAFFORD. Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent,
    Mark'd for the gallows, lay your weapons down;
    If you go forward; therefore yield or die.
  CADE. As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not;
    For I am rightful heir unto the crown.
  STAFFORD. Villain, thy father was a plasterer;
    Married the Duke of Clarence' daughter, did he not?
  CADE. Ay, there's the question; but I say 'tis true.
    The elder of them being put to nurse,
  DICK. Nay, 'tis too true; therefore he shall be king.
  SMITH. Sir, he made a chimney in my father's house, and the bricks
    are alive at this day to testify it; therefore deny it not.
  ALL. Ay, marry, will we; therefore get ye gone.
  WILLIAM STAFFORD. Jack Cade, the Duke of York hath taught you this.
    tell the King from me that for his father's sake, Henry the
  DICK. And furthermore, we'll have the Lord Say's head for selling
    the dukedom of Maine.
  CADE. And good reason; for thereby is England main'd and fain to go
    tell you that that Lord Say hath gelded the commonwealth and made
    therefore he is a traitor.
  CADE. Nay, answer if you can; the Frenchmen are our enemies. Go to,
    then, I ask but this: can he that speaks with the tongue of an
  ALL. No, no; and therefore we'll have his head.
    Assail them with the army of the King.
    Proclaim them traitors that are up with Cade;
    That those which fly before the battle ends
    May, even in their wives'and children's sight,
    Be hang'd up for example at their doors.
    And you that be the King's friends, follow me.
                           Exeunt the TWO STAFFORDS and soldiers
  CADE. And you that love the commons follow me.
    For they are thrifty honest men and such
    As would- but that they dare not- take our parts.
  CADE. But then are we in order when we are most out of order. Come,
Another part of Blackheath
Alarums to the fight, wherein both the STAFFORDS are slain.
Enter CADE and the rest
  CADE. Where's Dick, the butcher of Ashford?
  CADE. They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and thou behavedst
    therefore thus will I reward thee- the Lent shall be as long
    HUMPHREY'S brigandine] This monument of the victory will I bear,
    and the bodies shall be dragged at my horse heels till I do come
    to London, where we will have the mayor's sword borne before us.
  DICK. If we mean to thrive and do good, break open the gaols and
    let out the prisoners.
  CADE. Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come, let's march towards
Enter the KING with a supplication, and the QUEEN with SUFFOLK'S head;
the DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM, and the LORD SAY
  QUEEN. Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind
    Think therefore on revenge and cease to weep.
    But where's the body that I should embrace?
  BUCKINGHAM. What answer makes your Grace to the rebels'
    Should perish by the sword! And I myself,
    Rather than bloody war shall cut them short,
    Will parley with Jack Cade their general.
    And could it not enforce them to relent
    That were unworthy to behold the same?
  QUEEN. No, my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee.
    Descended from the Duke of Clarence' house,
    Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother's death
    Hath given them heart and courage to proceed.
    They call false caterpillars and intend their death.
  KING HENRY. O graceless men! they know not what they do.
    Until a power be rais'd to put them down.
  QUEEN. Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive,
  KING HENRY. Lord Say, the traitors hate thee;
    The sight of me is odious in their eyes;
    And therefore in this city will I stay
                      Enter another MESSENGER
    The citizens fly and forsake their houses;
    Join with the traitor; and they jointly swear
    To spoil the city and your royal court.
  KING HENRY. [To LORD SAY] Farewell, my lord, trust not the Kentish
    And therefore am I bold and resolute.                 Exeunt
Enter LORD SCALES Upon the Tower, walking. Then enter two or three CITIZENS,
  FIRST CITIZEN. No, my lord, nor likely to be slain; for they have
    won the bridge, killing all those that withstand them.
    The Lord Mayor craves aid of your honour from the
    Tower, to defend the city from the rebels.
    But I am troubled here with them myself;
    The rebels have assay'd to win the Tower.
    But get you to Smithfield, and gather head,
    And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe;
Enter JACK CADE and the rest, and strikes his staff on London Stone
    London Stone, I charge and command that, of the city's cost, the
    calls me other than Lord Mortimer.
  CADE. Knock him down there.                    [They kill him]
  DICK. My lord, there's an army gathered together in Smithfield.
  CADE. Come then, let's go fight with them. But first go and set
    London Bridge on fire; and, if you can, burn down the Tower too.
Alarums. MATTHEW GOFFE is slain, and all the rest.  Then enter JACK CADE,
  CADE. So, sirs. Now go some and pull down the Savoy; others to th'
    Inns of Court; down with them all.
  DICK. Only that the laws of England may come out of your mouth.
  JOHN. [Aside] Mass, 'twill be sore law then; for he was thrust in
    the mouth with a spear, and 'tis not whole yet.
  CADE. I have thought upon it; it shall be so. Away, burn all the
    records of the realm. My mouth shall be the Parliament of
  MESSENGER. My lord, a prize, a prize! Here's the Lord Say, which
    sold the towns in France; he that made us pay one and twenty
    fifteens, and one shining to the pound, the last subsidy.
                Enter GEORGE BEVIS, with the LORD SAY
    Majesty for giving up of Normandy unto Mounsieur Basimecu the
    Dauphin of France? Be it known unto thee by these presence, even
    the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I am the besom that must
    sweep the court clean of such filth as thou art. Thou hast most
    traitorously corrupted the youth of the realm in erecting a
    grammar school; and whereas, before, our forefathers had no other
    books but the score and the tally, thou hast caused printing to
    be us'd, and, contrary to the King, his crown, and dignity, thou
    hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and a verb, and
    them about matters they were not able to answer. Moreover, thou
    hast put them in prison, and because they could not read, thou
    hast hang'd them, when, indeed, only for that cause they have
    honester men than thou go in their hose and doublets.
  DICK. And work in their shirt too, as myself, for example, that am
    Kent, in the Commentaries Caesar writ,
    Is term'd the civil'st place of all this isle.
    Sweet is the country, because full of riches;
    Yet, to recover them, would lose my life.
    But to maintain the King, the realm, and you?
    Because my book preferr'd me to the King,
    And seeing ignorance is the curse of God,
    Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven,
  CADE. Tut, when struck'st thou one blow in the field?
    Those that I never saw, and struck them dead.
  CADE. Ye shall have a hempen caudle then, and the help of hatchet.
    off his head presently, and then break into his son-in-law's
    house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off his head, and bring them
    both upon two poles hither.
    And therefore yet relent and save my life.
    LORD SAY]  The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head
    on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute; there shall not a
    maid be married, but she shall pay to me her maidenhead ere they
    command that their wives be as free as heart can wish or tongue
                      Re-enter one with the heads
  CADE. But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another, for they
    lov'd well when they were alive. Now part them again, lest they
    consult about the giving up of some more towns in France.
    Soldiers, defer the spoil of the city until night; for with these
    borne before us instead of maces will we ride through the
    streets, and at every corner have them kiss. Away!     Exeunt
    down! Throw them into Thames!               [Sound a parley]
    or parley when I command them kill?
  BUCKINGHAM. Ay, here they be that dare and will disturb thee.
    And therefore yet relent, and save my life.
    Know, Cade, we come ambassadors from the King
    Unto the commons whom thou hast misled;
    And here pronounce free pardon to them all
    That will forsake thee and go home in peace.
    Who loves the King, and will embrace his pardon,
    Who hateth him and honours not his father,
    Henry the Fifth, that made all France to quake,
  ALL. God save the King! God save the King!
    hang'd with your about your necks? Hath my sword therefore broke
    through London gates, that you should leave me at the White Hart
    in Southwark? I thought ye would never have given out these arms
    recreants and dastards, and delight to live in slavery to the
    nobility. Let them break your backs with burdens, take your
  CLIFFORD. Is Cade the son of Henry the Fifth,
    Will he conduct you through the heart of France,
    And make the meanest of you earls and dukes?
    Nor knows he how to live but by the spoil,
    I see them lording it in London streets,
    Crying 'Villiago!' unto all they meet.
  ALL. A Clifford! a Clifford! We'll follow the King and Clifford.
  CADE. Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as this
    multitude? The name of Henry the Fifth hales them to an hundred
    mischiefs, and makes them leave me desolate. I see them lay their
    heads together to surprise me. My sword make way for me for here
    is no staying. In despite of the devils and hell, have through
    the very middest of you! and heavens and honour be witness that
    And he that brings his head unto the King
                                             Exeunt some of them
    To reconcile you all unto the King.                   Exeunt
Sound trumpets. Enter KING, QUEEN, and SOMERSET, on the terrace
  KING HENRY. Why, Buckingham, is the traitor Cade surpris'd?
     Enter, below, multitudes, with halters about their necks
    And humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
  ALL. God save the King! God save the King!
    Is marching hitherward in proud array,
    His arms are only to remove from thee
    I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him
    And ask him what's the reason of these arms.
    Tell him I'll send Duke Edmund to the Tower-
    And Somerset, we will commit thee thither
    ready to famish! These five days have I hid me in these woods and
    durst not peep out, for all the country is laid for me; but now
    or pick a sallet another while, which is not amiss to cool a
    man's stomach this hot weather. And I think this word 'sallet'
    instead of a quart-pot to drink in; and now the word 'sallet'
  IDEN. Lord, who would live turmoiled in the court
    And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
    This small inheritance my father left me
    I seek not to wax great by others' waning
    Or gather wealth I care not with what envy;
    And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.
  CADE. Here's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray, for
    betray me, and get a thousand crowns of the King by carrying my
    head to him; but I'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich and
    I know thee not; why then should I betray thee?
    Climbing my walls in spite of me the owner,
    But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms?
  CADE. Brave thee? Ay, by the best blood that ever was broach'd, and
    beard thee too. Look on me well: I have eat no meat these five
    Set limb to limb, and thou art far the lesser;
    My foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast,
    And if mine arm be heaved in the air,
    Thy grave is digg'd already in the earth.
  CADE. By my valour, the most complete champion that ever I heard!
    Steel, if thou turn the edge, or cut not out the burly bon'd
    God on my knees thou mayst be turn'd to hobnails. [Here they
    fight; CADE falls] O, I am slain! famine and no other hath slain
    me. Let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me but the
    ten meals I have lost, and I'd defy them all. Wither, garden, and
    because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled.
    Sword, I will hallow thee for this thy deed
    And hang thee o'er my tomb when I am dead.
    To emblaze the honour that thy master got.
    me she hath lost her best man, and exhort all the world to be
    Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee!
    Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heels
    And there cut off thy most ungracious head,
    Which I will bear in triumph to the King,
    And pluck the crown from feeble Henry's head:
    Ah, sancta majestas! who would not buy thee dear?
    Let them obey that knows not how to rule;
    On which I'll toss the flower-de-luce of France.
  BUCKINGHAM. York, if thou meanest well I greet thee well.
    To know the reason of these arms in peace;
    Or dare to bring thy force so near the court.
    I am so angry at these abject terms;
    I am far better born than is the King,
    But I must make fair weather yet awhile,
    Buckingham, I prithee, pardon me
    The cause why I have brought this army hither
    Is to remove proud Somerset from the King,
    Seditious to his Grace and to the state.
    But if thy arms be to no other end,
    The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.
    I'll send them all as willing as I live:
                  Enter the KING, and attendants
    That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm?
  KING HENRY. Then what intends these forces thou dost bring?
  YORK. To heave the traitor Somerset from hence,
    May pass into the presence of a king,
    Tell me, my friend, art thou the man that slew him?
    We give thee for reward a thousand marks,
    And will that thou thenceforth attend on us.
                    Enter the QUEEN and SOMERSET
    Go, bid her hide him quickly from the Duke.
    Shall I endure the sight of Somerset?
    King did I call thee? No, thou art not king;
    That gold must round engirt these brows of mine,
    Is able with the change to kill and cure.
    And with the same to act controlling laws.
  SOMERSET. O monstrous traitor! I arrest thee, York,
    Of capital treason 'gainst the King and crown.
  YORK. Wouldst have me kneel? First let me ask of these,
    If they can brook I bow a knee to man.
    They'll pawn their swords for my enfranchisement.
  QUEEN. Call hither Clifford; bid him come amain,
    To say if that the bastard boys of York
    Shall be the surety for their traitor father.
    The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,
    Shall be their father's bail; and bane to those
    That for my surety will refuse the boys!
    See where they come: I'll warrant they'll make it good.
  QUEEN. And here comes Clifford to deny their bail.
  CLIFFORD. Health and all happiness to my lord the King!
  YORK. I thank thee, Clifford. Say, what news with thee?
    For thy mistaking so, we pardon thee.
    To Bedlam with him! Is the man grown mad?
  CLIFFORD. He is a traitor; let him to the Tower,
    His sons, he says, shall give their words for him.
  EDWARD. Ay, noble father, if our words will serve.
  RICHARD. And if words will not, then our weapons shall.
    Call hither to the stake my two brave bears,
    That with the very shaking of their chains
    They may astonish these fell-lurking curs.
               Enter the EARLS OF WARWICK and SALISBURY
  CLIFFORD. Are these thy bears? We'll bait thy bears to death,
    And manacle the berard in their chains,
    If thou dar'st bring them to the baiting-place.
    Who, being suffer'd, with the bear's fell paw,
    What, wilt thou on thy death-bed play the ruffian
    If it be banish'd from the frosty head,
    Where shall it find a harbour in the earth?
    That bows unto the grave with mickle age.
    To reave the orphan of his patrimony,
    To wring the widow from her custom'd right,
    And have no other reason for this wrong
  YORK. Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou hast,
  CLIFFORD. The first I warrant thee, if dreams prove true.
    To keep thee from the tempest of the field.
    Might I but know thee by thy household badge.
  WARWICK. Now, by my father's badge, old Nevil's crest,
    The rampant bear chain'd to the ragged staff,
    As on a mountain-top the cedar shows,
    Even to affright thee with the view thereof.
    Despite the berard that protects the bear.
  YOUNG CLIFFORD. And so to arms, victorious father,
    To quell the rebels and their complices.
Alarums to the battle. Enter WARWICK
    And if thou dost not hide thee from the bear,
    Now, when the angry trumpet sounds alarum
    And dead men's cries do fill the empty air,
    Proud northern lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
  WARWICK is hoarse with calling thee to arms.
    Even of the bonny beast he lov'd so well.
  WARWICK. Of one or both of us the time is come.
  YORK. Hold, Warwick, seek thee out some other chase,
    It grieves my soul to leave thee unassail'd.            Exit
  CLIFFORD. My soul and body on the action both!
  YORK. A dreadful lay! Address thee instantly.
  YORK. Thus war hath given thee peace, for thou art still.
  YOUNG CLIFFORD. Shame and confusion! All is on the rout;
    Whom angry heavens do make their minister,
    Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part
    The name of valour.                 [Sees his father's body]
    O, let the vile world end
    And the premised flames of the last day
    Knit earth and heaven together!
    Now let the general trumpet blow his blast,
    To cease! Wast thou ordain'd, dear father,
    No more will I their babes. Tears virginal
    Shall be to me even as the dew to fire;
    And beauty, that the tyrant oft reclaims,
    Meet I an infant of the house of York,
    So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders;
    But then Aeneas bare a living load,
    Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine.
                                              Exit with the body
  RICHARD. So, lie thou there;
    Hath made the wizard famous in his death.
        Fight. Excursions. Enter KING, QUEEN, and others
  KING HENRY. Can we outrun the heavens? Good Margaret, stay.
    To give the enemy way, and to secure us
    If you be ta'en, we then should see the bottom
    Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.
    To see their day and them our fortune give.
    And, like a gallant in the brow of youth,
  RICHARD. My noble father,
    Persuaded him from any further act;
    But still where danger was, still there I met him;
  YORK. I know our safety is to follow them;
    For, as I hear, the King is fled to London
    Let us pursue him ere the writs go forth.
    What says Lord Warwick? Shall we after them?
  WARWICK. After them? Nay, before them, if we can.
    And more such days as these to us befall!             Exeunt
  SIR JOHN MORTIMER, uncle to the Duke of York
  SIR HUGH MORTIMER, uncle to the Duke of York
  LORD RIVERS, brother to Lady Grey
  A SON that has killed his father
  BONA, sister to the French Queen
and soldiers, with white roses in their hats
  WARWICK. I wonder how the King escap'd our hands.
  YORK. While we pursu'd the horsemen of the north,
    Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
    Cheer'd up the drooping army, and himself,
    Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.
  EDWARD. Lord Stafford's father, Duke of Buckingham,
    Is either slain or wounded dangerous;
    That this is true, father, behold his blood.
  MONTAGUE. And, brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshire's blood,
    Whom I encount'red as the battles join'd.
  RICHARD. Speak thou for me, and tell them what I did.
  NORFOLK. Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!
    Before I see thee seated in that throne
    Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
    I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.
    This is the palace of the fearful King,
    And this the regal seat. Possess it, York;
  YORK. Assist me then, sweet Warwick, and I will;
    For hither we have broken in by force.
  WARWICK. And when the King comes, offer him no violence.
  WARWICK. Neither the King, nor he that loves him best,
    Resolve thee, Richard; claim the English crown.
                                      [YORK occupies the throne]
        WESTMORELAND, EXETER, and others, with red roses in
                            their hats
  KING HENRY. My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
    Even in the chair of state! Belike he means,
    Back'd by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
    To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
    Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father;
  CLIFFORD. The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.
    He durst not sit there had your father liv'd.
    My gracious lord, here in the parliament
    Let us assail the family of York.
  KING HENRY. Ah, know you not the city favours them,
    And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?
  EXETER. But when the Duke is slain they'll quickly fly.
  KING HENRY. Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
    To make a shambles of the parliament house!
    Shall be the war that Henry means to use.
  EXETER. For shame, come down; he made thee Duke of York.
  YORK. 'Twas my inheritance, as the earldom was.
  EXETER. Thy father was a traitor to the crown.
  WARWICK. Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown
    And that the Lord of Westmoreland shall maintain.
    That we are those which chas'd you from the field,
    And slew your fathers, and with colours spread
    March'd through the city to the palace gates.
  WESTMORELAND. Plantagenet, of thee, and these thy sons,
    Than drops of blood were in my father's veins.
    I send thee, Warwick, such a messenger
  YORK. Will you we show our title to the crown?
    If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.
  KING HENRY. What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
    Thy father was, as thou art, Duke of York;
    Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March:
    I am the son of Henry the Fifth,
    Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop,
    And seiz'd upon their towns and provinces.
    Father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.
  EDWARD. Sweet father, do so; set it on your head.
  MONTAGUE. Good brother, as thou lov'st and honourest arms,
  RICHARD. Sound drums and trumpets, and the King will fly.
    Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
    Ay, and their colours, often borne in France,
  KING HENRY. Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.
  YORK. What then?
  KING HENRY. An if he may, then am I lawful King;
    For Richard, in the view of many lords,
    Resign'd the crown to Henry the Fourth,
    Whose heir my father was, and I am his.
    But that the next heir should succeed and reign.
  EXETER. His is the right, and therefore pardon me.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st,
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Thou art deceiv'd. 'Tis not thy southern power
    Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
    Can set the Duke up in despite of me.
    Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father!
    Or I will fill the house with armed men,
    And over the chair of state, where now he sits,
                                [He stamps with his foot and the
                                       soldiers show themselves]
  YORK. Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,
    Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.
  CLIFFORD. What wrong is this unto the Prince your son!
  WESTMORELAND. I cannot stay to hear these articles.
  CLIFFORD. Come, cousin, let us tell the Queen these news.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Be thou a prey unto the house of York
  WARWICK. Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.
  EXETER. They seek revenge, and therefore will not yield.
    The crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever;
    And neither by treason nor hostility
                                        [Coming from the throne]
  KING HENRY. And long live thou, and these thy forward sons!
  EXETER. Accurs'd be he that seeks to make them foes!
                                   [Sennet. Here they come down]
  MONTAGUE. And I unto the sea, from whence I came.
                                             Exeunt the YORKISTS
  KING HENRY. And I, with grief and sorrow, to the court.
            Enter QUEEN MARGARET and the PRINCE OF WALES
  EXETER. Here comes the Queen, whose looks bewray her anger.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Nay, go not from me; I will follow thee.
    And never seen thee, never borne thee son,
    Seeing thou hast prov'd so unnatural a father!
    Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood there
    Rather than have made that savage duke thine heir,
  PRINCE OF WALES. Father, you cannot disinherit me.
    The Earl of Warwick and the Duke enforc'd me.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Enforc'd thee! Art thou King and wilt be
    I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch!
    And giv'n unto the house of York such head
    As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.
    To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
    Warwick is Chancellor and the lord of Calais;
    Stern Falconbridge commands the narrow seas;
    The Duke is made Protector of the realm;
    Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
    The soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes
    The northern lords that have forsworn thy colours
    Will follow mine, if once they see them spread;
    And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace
    And utter ruin of the house of York.
    Thus do I leave thee. Come, son, let's away;
    Our army is ready; come, we'll after them.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Thou hast spoke too much already; get thee gone.
  PRINCE OF WALES. When I return with victory from the field
    I'll see your Grace; till then I'll follow her.
                            Exeunt QUEEN MARGARET and the PRINCE
    Tire on the flesh of me and of my son!
    I'll write unto them, and entreat them fair;
    Come, cousin, you shall be the messenger.
  EXETER. And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.        Exeunt
  RICHARD. Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.
  EDWARD. No, I can better play the orator.
                     Enter the DUKE OF YORK
  YORK. Why, how now, sons and brother! at a strife?
    The crown of England, father, which is yours.
  EDWARD. Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now.
    By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
    It will outrun you, father, in the end.
  RICHARD. I'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.
    Henry had none, but did usurp the place;
    Therefore, to arms. And, father, do but think
    Until the white rose that I wear be dy'd
    Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.
    Brother, thou shalt to London presently
    Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk
    With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise;
    In them I trust, for they are soldiers,
    And yet the King not privy to my drift,
    Nor any of the house of Lancaster?
  MESSENGER. The Queen with all the northern earls and lords
    And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.
  YORK. Ay, with my sword. What! think'st thou that we fear them?
    My brother Montague shall post to London.
    Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
    Whom we have left protectors of the King,
    With pow'rful policy strengthen themselves
  MONTAGUE. Brother, I go; I'll win them, fear it not.
    The army of the Queen mean to besiege us.
  SIR JOHN. She shall not need; we'll meet her in the field.
  RICHARD. Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need.
  EDWARD. I hear their drums. Let's set our men in order,
    And issue forth and bid them battle straight.
  YORK. Five men to twenty! Though the odds be great,
    When as the enemy hath been ten to one;
    Why should I not now have the like success?           Exeunt
  RUTLAND. Ah, whither shall I fly to scape their hands?
    As for the brat of this accursed duke,
    Whose father slew my father, he shall die.
    That makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.
  RUTLAND. So looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch
  CLIFFORD. In vain thou speak'st, poor boy; my father's blood
    Hath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter.
  RUTLAND. Then let my father's blood open it again:
  CLIFFORD. Had I thy brethren here, their lives and thine
    No, if I digg'd up thy forefathers' graves
    And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
    The sight of any of the house of York
    And till I root out their accursed line
    To thee I pray: sweet Clifford, pity me.
  RUTLAND. I never did thee harm; why wilt thou slay me?
  CLIFFORD. Thy father hath.
    Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
    Thy father slew my father; therefore, die.       [Stabs him]
Another part of the field
Alarum. Enter the DUKE OF YORK
  YORK. The army of the Queen hath got the field.
    And all my followers to the eager foe
    Turn back and fly, like ships before the wind,
    My sons- God knows what hath bechanced them;
    But this I know- they have demean'd themselves
    And thrice cried 'Courage, father! fight it out.'
    With purple falchion, painted to the hilt
    And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
    With bootless labour swim against the tide
    And I am faint and cannot fly their fury;
    And were I strong, I would not shun their fury.
               the PRINCE OF WALES, and soldiers
    With downright payment show'd unto my father.
    And made an evening at the noontide prick.
  YORK. My ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth
  CLIFFORD. So cowards fight when they can fly no further;
    So doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons;
    So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
    Breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.
  YORK. O Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
    Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this!
  CLIFFORD. I will not bandy with thee word for word,
    But buckler with thee blows, twice two for one.
    I would prolong awhile the traitor's life.
  CLIFFORD. Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. So doth the cony struggle in the net.
  YORK. So triumph thieves upon their conquer'd booty;
    Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
    The wanton Edward and the lusty George?
    Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
    Look, York: I stain'd this napkin with the blood
    Made issue from the bosom of the boy;
    I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
    Alas, poor York! but that I hate thee deadly,
    I prithee grieve to make me merry, York.
    And I to make thee mad do mock thee thus.
    And rob his temples of the diadem,
    Off with the crown and with the crown his head;
    And, whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.
  CLIFFORD. That is my office, for my father's sake.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Nay, stay; let's hear the orisons he makes.
    Whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth!
    Upon their woes whom fortune captivates!
    I would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush.
    To tell thee whence thou cam'st, of whom deriv'd,
    Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
    Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
    Of both the Sicils and Jerusalem,
    Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
    It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen;
    Unless the adage must be verified,
    That beggars mounted run their horse to death.
    But, God He knows, thy share thereof is small.
    'Tis virtue that doth make them most admir'd;
    The contrary doth make thee wond'red at.
    'Tis government that makes them seem divine;
    The want thereof makes thee abominable.
    As the Antipodes are unto us,
    Or as the south to the septentrion.
    How couldst thou drain the life-blood of the child,
    To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
    And when the rage allays, the rain begins.
    'Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false Frenchwoman.
  YORK. That face of his the hungry cannibals
    See, ruthless queen, a hapless father's tears.
    And I with tears do wash the blood away.
    Keep thou the napkin, and go boast of this;
    And if thou tell'st the heavy story right,
    Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears;
    There, take the crown, and with the crown my curse;
    And in thy need such comfort come to thee
    Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world;
    Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
  CLIFFORD. Here's for my oath, here's for my father's death.
    My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.
    So York may overlook the town of York.
A march. Enter EDWARD, RICHARD, and their power
  EDWARD. I wonder how our princely father scap'd,
    Or whether he be scap'd away or no
    Had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news;
    Had he been slain, we should have heard the news;
    How fares my brother? Why is he so sad?
    Where our right valiant father is become.
    I saw him in the battle range about,
    Methought he bore him in the thickest troop
    Who having pinch'd a few and made them cry,
    So far'd our father with his enemies;
    So fled his enemies my warlike father.
    See how the morning opes her golden gates
    And takes her farewell of the glorious sun.
    How well resembles it the prime of youth,
    Not separated with the racking clouds,
    See, see! they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
    As if they vow'd some league inviolable.
    Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.
    In this the heaven figures some event.
  EDWARD. 'Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.
    I think it cites us, brother, to the field,
    That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
    Should notwithstanding join our lights together
    And overshine the earth, as this the world.
    You love the breeder better than the male.
    When as the noble Duke of York was slain,
    Your princely father and my loving lord!
    And stood against them as the hope of Troy
    Against the Greeks that would have ent'red Troy.
    Hews down and fells the hardest-timber'd oak.
    By many hands your father was subdu'd;
    But only slaught'red by the ireful arm
    Of unrelenting Clifford and the Queen,
    Who crown'd the gracious Duke in high despite,
    A napkin steeped in the harmless blood
    They took his head, and on the gates of York
    They set the same; and there it doth remain,
    For hand to hand he would have vanquish'd thee.
    Might in the ground be closed up in rest!
    To weep is to make less the depth of grief.
    Tears then for babes; blows and revenge for me!
  EDWARD. His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;
    Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun;
    Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.
         March. Enter WARWICK, MONTAGUE, and their army
    The words would add more anguish than the wounds.
    O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!
    Which held thee dearly as his soul's redemption
    Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.
  WARWICK. Ten days ago I drown'd these news in tears;
    I come to tell you things sith then befall'n.
    After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
    Where your brave father breath'd his latest gasp,
    Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run,
    I, then in London, keeper of the King,
    Muster'd my soldiers, gathered flocks of friends,
    March'd toward Saint Albans to intercept the Queen,
    Bearing the King in my behalf along;
    But whether 'twas the coldness of the King,
    That robb'd my soldiers of their heated spleen,
    Or whether 'twas report of her success,
    Our soldiers', like the night-owl's lazy flight
    Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
    I cheer'd them up with justice of our cause,
    But all in vain; they had no heart to fight,
    And we in them no hope to win the day;
    So that we fled: the King unto the Queen;
    Lord George your brother, Norfolk, and myself,
    For in the marches here we heard you were
    Making another head to fight again.
  EDWARD. Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
  WARWICK. Some six miles off the Duke is with the soldiers;
    And for your brother, he was lately sent
    Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry's head
    And wring the awful sceptre from his fist,
    Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
    If for the last, say 'Ay,' and to it, lords.
  WARWICK. Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out;
    And therefore comes my brother Montague.
    With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
    And of their feather many moe proud birds,
    Have wrought the easy-melting King like wax.
    His oath enrolled in the parliament;
    And now to London all the crew are gone
    May make against the house of Lancaster.
    Now if the help of Norfolk and myself,
    With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
    Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,
    And when thou fail'st- as God forbid the hour!-
    Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
    But sound the trumpets and about our task.
    I come to pierce it or to give thee mine.
  WARWICK. Why, then it sorts; brave warriors, let's away.
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY, QUEEN MARGARET, the PRINCE OF WALES, CLIFFORD,
    Yonder's the head of that arch-enemy
    Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?
  KING HENRY. Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wreck-
    To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
    Not to the beast that would usurp their den.
    Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
    Who scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting?
    And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
    Which argued thee a most unloving father.
    Unreasonable creatures feed their young;
    And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
    Yet, in protection of their tender ones,
    Who hath not seen them- even with those wings
    Which sometime they have us'd with fearful flight-
    Make war with him that climb'd unto their nest,
    Offering their own lives in their young's defence
    For shame, my liege, make them your precedent!
    Should lose his birthright by his father's fault,
    'What my great-grandfather and grandsire got
    My careless father fondly gave away'?
    Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy;
  KING HENRY. Full well hath Clifford play'd the orator,
    Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
    And would my father had left me no more!
    For all the rest is held at such a rate
    Unsheathe your sword and dub him presently.
  PRINCE OF WALES. My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
    I'll draw it as apparent to the crown,
    And in that quarrel use it to the death.
    Comes Warwick, backing of the Duke of York,
    And in the towns, as they do march along,
    Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.
  CLIFFORD. I would your Highness would depart the field:
  KING HENRY. Why, that's my fortune too; therefore I'll stay.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Be it with resolution, then, to fight.
  PRINCE OF WALES. My royal father, cheer these noble lords,
    Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry 'Saint George!'
    Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?
    Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms
    You that are King, though he do wear the crown,
    Who should succeed the father but the son?
  RICHARD. Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!
  CLIFFORD. Ay, crook-back, here I stand to answer thee,
    Or any he, the proudest of thy sort.
  RICHARD. For God's sake, lords, give signal to the fight.
  WARWICK. What say'st thou, Henry? Wilt thou yield the crown?
  WARWICK. 'Twas not your valour, Clifford, drove me thence.
  RICHARD. Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.
    Break off the parley; for scarce I can refrain
  CLIFFORD. I slew thy father; call'st thou him a child?
    As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland;
    But ere sunset I'll make thee curse the deed.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.
  KING HENRY. I prithee give no limits to my tongue:
  CLIFFORD. My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
    Cannot be cur'd by words; therefore be still.
  RICHARD. Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword.
    A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day
    That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.
  WARWICK. If thou deny, their blood upon thy head;
  RICHARD. Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands;
    For well I wot thou hast thy mother's tongue.
  QUEEN MARGARET. But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam;
    Mark'd by the destinies to be avoided,
    Whose father bears the title of a king-
    As if a channel should be call'd the sea-
    And ne'er was Agamemmon's brother wrong'd
    By that false woman as this king by thee.
    His father revell'd in the heart of France,
    And tam'd the King, and made the Dauphin stoop;
    Even then that sunshine brew'd a show'r for him
    That wash'd his father's fortunes forth of France
    And we, in pity of the gentle King,
    Had slipp'd our claim until another age.
    We set the axe to thy usurping root;
    And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,
    We'll never leave till we have hewn thee down,
  EDWARD. And in this resolution I defy thee;
    Since thou deniest the gentle King to speak.
    And either victory or else a grave!
    I lay me down a little while to breathe;
    Have robb'd my strong-knit sinews of their strength,
    What counsel give you? Whither shall we fly?
  EDWARD. Bootless is flight: they follow us with wings;
    Thy brother's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
    Broach'd with the steely point of Clifford's lance;
    And in the very pangs of death he cried,
    'Warwick, revenge! Brother, revenge my death.'
    So, underneath the belly of their steeds,
    That stain'd their fetlocks in his smoking blood,
    The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.
  WARWICK. Then let the earth be drunken with our blood.
    Wailing our losses, whiles the foe doth rage,
    And look upon, as if the tragedy
    Till either death hath clos'd these eyes of mine
    And ere my knee rise from the earth's cold face
  RICHARD. Brother, give me thy hand; and, gentle Warwick,
    Let me embrace thee in my weary arms.
  GEORGE. Yet let us all together to our troops,
    And give them leave to fly that will not stay,
    And call them pillars that will stand to us;
    And if we thrive, promise them such rewards
    As victors wear at the Olympian games.
    This may plant courage in their quailing breasts,
Another part of the field
  RICHARD. Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone.
    Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
  CLIFFORD. Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone.
    This is the hand that stabbed thy father York;
    And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland;
    And here's the heart that triumphs in their death
    And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother
    To execute the like upon thyself;
    And so, have at thee!                           [They fight]
  RICHARD. Nay, Warwick, single out some other chase;
Another part of the field
  KING HENRY. This battle fares like to the morning's war,
    What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
    Can neither call it perfect day nor night.
    Forc'd by the tide to combat with the wind;
    Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea
    Forc'd to retire by fury of the wind.
    Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind;
    Now one the better, then another best;
    Yet neither conqueror nor conquered.
    So is the equal poise of this fell war.
    To whom God will, there be the victory!
    Have chid me from the battle, swearing both
    They prosper best of all when I am thence.
    Thereby to see the minutes how they run-
    How many makes the hour full complete,
    How many hours brings about the day,
    How many days will finish up the year,
    When this is known, then to divide the times-
    So many weeks ere the poor fools will can;
    So many years ere I shall shear the fleece:
    Pass'd over to the end they were created,
    Gives not the hawthorn bush a sweeter shade
    To shepherds looking on their silly sheep,
    To kings that fear their subjects' treachery?
    And to conclude: the shepherd's homely curds,
    His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle,
       Alarum. Enter a son that hath kill'd his Father, at
                         another door
  SON. Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.
    And I, that haply take them from him now,
    May yet ere night yield both my life and them
    Who's this? O God! It is my father's face,
    From London by the King was I press'd forth;
    My father, being the Earl of Warwick's man,
    Came on the part of York, press'd by his master;
    And pardon, father, for I knew not thee.
    My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks;
    And no more words till they have flow'd their fill.
    Whiles lions war and battle for their dens,
    Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
    Weep, wretched man; I'll aid thee tear for tear;
    Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,
    Blown with the windy tempest of my heart
    O boy, thy father gave thee life too soon,
    And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!
    O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
    The red rose and the white are on his face,
    The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth.
    Wither one rose, and let the other flourish!
  SON. How will my mother for a father's death
  KING HENRY. How will the country for these woeful chances
    Misthink the King, and not be satisfied!
  SON. Was ever son so rued a father's death?
  FATHER. Was ever father so bemoan'd his son?
  SON. I'll bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.
                                              Exit with the body
    And so obsequious will thy father be,
    Even for the loss of thee, having no more,
    I'll bear thee hence; and let them fight that will,
                                              Exit with the body
  PRINCE OF WALES. Fly, father, fly; for all your friends are fled,
    Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
    And bloody steel grasp'd in their ireful hands,
    Are at our backs; and therefore hence amain.
  EXETER. Away! for vengeance comes along with them.
  KING HENRY. Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter.
    Whither the Queen intends. Forward; away!             Exeunt
Another part of the field
    My love and fear glu'd many friends to thee;
    And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
    Thy burning car never had scorch'd the earth!
    Or as thy father and his father did,
    Giving no ground unto the house of York,
    They never then had sprung like summer flies;
    For at their hands I have deserv'd no pity.
    Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest;
    I stabb'd your fathers' bosoms: split my breast.
  EDWARD. Now breathe we, lords. Good fortune bids us pause
    And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
    Some troops pursue the bloody-minded Queen
    Command an argosy to stern the waves.
    But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?
    For, though before his face I speak the words,
    Your brother Richard mark'd him for the grave;
  EDWARD. And now the battle's ended,
    Who not contented that he lopp'd the branch
    But set his murd'ring knife unto the root
    I mean our princely father, Duke of York.
  WARWICK. From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
    Your father's head, which Clifford placed there;
    Instead whereof let this supply the room.
    Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
    Which in the time of death he gave our father.
  EDWARD. Thou pitied'st Rutland, I will pity thee.
  WARWICK. They mock thee, Clifford; swear as thou wast wont.
  RICHARD. What, not an oath? Nay, then the world goes hard
    This hand should chop it off, and with the issuing blood
    Stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst
  WARWICK. Ay, but he's dead. Off with the traitor's head,
    And rear it in the place your father's stands.
    From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France,
    And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen.
    So shalt thou sinew both these lands together;
    For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
    Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
    First will I see the coronation;
    And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea
    And never will I undertake the thing
    Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester;
    To see these honours in possession.                   Exeunt
A chase in the north of England
Enter two KEEPERS, with cross-bows in their hands
    For through this laund anon the deer will come;
    Culling the principal of all the deer.
  SECOND KEEPER. I'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.
  FIRST KEEPER. That cannot be; the noise of thy cross-bow
    Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
    Here stand we both, and aim we at the best;
    And, for the time shall not seem tedious,
    I'll tell thee what befell me on a day
    Thy place is fill'd, thy sceptre wrung from thee,
    No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
    No, not a man comes for redress of thee;
    For how can I help them and not myself?
    This is the quondam King; let's seize upon him.
  KING HENRY. Let me embrace thee, sour adversity,
    For wise men say it is the wisest course.
    And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
    Is thither gone to crave the French King's sister
    By this account, then, Margaret may win him;
    Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,
    And in conclusion wins the King from her
    To strengthen and support King Edward's place.
    Art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn!
    You are the king King Edward hath depos'd;
    My father and my grandfather were kings;
    And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?
  KING HENRY. Why, am I dead? Do I not breathe a man?
    Look, as I blow this feather from my face,
    And as the air blows it to me again,
    And yielding to another when it blows,
    Commanded always by the greater gust,
    Such is the lightness of you common men.
    Go where you will, the King shall be commanded;
  FIRST KEEPER. We are true subjects to the King, King Edward.
  FIRST KEEPER. We charge you, in God's name and the King's,
    To go with us unto the officers.
  KING EDWARD. Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Albans' field
    His land then seiz'd on by the conqueror.
    Because in quarrel of the house of York
    I see the lady hath a thing to grant,
    Before the King will grant her humble suit.
  CLARENCE. [Aside to GLOUCESTER] He knows the game; how true he
    keeps the wind!
    And come some other time to know our mind.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside to CLARENCE] Nay, then whip me; he'll rather
  KING EDWARD. 'Twere pity they should lose their father's lands.
  LADY GREY. Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it, then.
    Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch.
  KING EDWARD. And would you not do much to do them good?
  LADY GREY. To do them good I would sustain some harm.
  KING EDWARD. Then get your husband's lands, to do them good.
  KING EDWARD. I'll tell you how these lands are to be got.
  KING EDWARD. What service wilt thou do me if I give them?
  LADY GREY. Why, then I will do what your Grace commands.
  GLOUCESTER. He plies her hard; and much rain wears the marble.
  CLARENCE. As red as fire! Nay, then her wax must melt.
  KING EDWARD. Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.
  KING EDWARD. But stay thee- 'tis the fruits of love I mean.
  KING EDWARD. Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.
  LADY GREY. Why, then you mean not as I thought you did.
  KING EDWARD. To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.
  LADY GREY. To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.
  KING EDWARD. Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.
  LADY GREY. Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower;
    For by that loss I will not purchase them.
  LADY GREY. Herein your Highness wrongs both them and me.
    Accords not with the sadness of my suit.
    Please you dismiss me, either with ay or no.
  CLARENCE. He is the bluntest wooer in Christendom.
    One way or other, she is for a king;
    Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?
  KING EDWARD. Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee
    And that is to enjoy thee for my love.
  LADY GREY. 'Twill grieve your Grace my sons should call you father.
  KING EDWARD.No more than when my daughters call thee mother.
    And, by God's Mother, I, being but a bachelor,
    Have other some. Why, 'tis a happy thing
    To be the father unto many sons.
  GLOUCESTER. The ghostly father now hath done his shrift.
  KING EDWARD. Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.
  GLOUCESTER. That would be ten days' wonder at the least.
  GLOUCESTER. By so much is the wonder in extremes.
  KING EDWARD. Well, jest on, brothers; I can tell you both
  KING EDWARD. See that he be convey'd unto the Tower.
    And go we, brothers, to the man that took him
    To cross me from the golden time I look for!
    And all the unlook'd for issue of their bodies,
    To take their rooms ere I can place myself.
    Why, then I do but dream on sovereignty;
    And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
    So do I wish the crown, being so far off;
    And so I chide the means that keeps me from it;
    And so I say I'll cut the causes off,
    Unless my hand and strength could equal them.
    Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard;
    What other pleasure can the world afford?
    Why, love forswore me in my mother's womb;
    To shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub
    That carries no impression like the dam.
    And am I, then, a man to be belov'd?
    I'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown,
    And yet I know not how to get the crown,
    That rents the thorns and is rent with the thorns,
    Seeking a way and straying from the way
    Not knowing how to find the open air,
    Torment myself to catch the English crown;
    I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall;
    I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk;
    I'll play the orator as well as Nestor,
    And, like a Sinon, take another Troy.
    I can add colours to the chameleon,
    Change shapes with Protheus for advantages,
    And set the murderous Machiavel to school.
    Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.           Exit
Flourish.  Enter LEWIS the French King, his sister BONA,
and the EARL of OXFORD.  LEWIS sits, and riseth up again
    And with dishonour laid me on the ground,
    And sit thee by our side. [Seats her by him] Yield not thy neck
    Now therefore be it known to noble Lewis
    Usurps the regal title and the seat
    This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
  LEWIS. Renowned Queen, with patience calm the storm,
  QUEEN MARGARET. The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.
  LEWIS. The more I stay, the more I'll succour thee.
    And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow!
  LEWIS. Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France?
    And then to crave a league of amity,
    To tell the passion of my sovereign's heart;
    Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
    Look therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage
    For though usurpers sway the rule a while
  WARWICK. Because thy father Henry did usurp;
    Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
    And, after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
    Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest;
    And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
    From these our Henry lineally descends.
    You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost
    All that which Henry the Fifth had gotten?
    Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.
    But for the rest: you tell a pedigree
  WARWICK. Can Oxford that did ever fence the right
    My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
    Was done to death; and more than so, my father,
    Even in the downfall of his mellow'd years,
    When nature brought him to the door of death?
    This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.
  WARWICK. And I the house of York.
    While I use further conference with Warwick.
  LEWIS. But is he gracious in the people's eye?
  LEWIS. Then further: all dissembling set aside,
    Tell me for truth the measure of his love
    Whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground,
    Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.
    Touching the jointure that your king must make,
    That Bona shall be wife to the English king.
  PRINCE OF WALES. To Edward, but not to the English king.
    But if your title to the crown be weak,
    You have a father able to maintain you,
    For both of you are birds of self-same feather.
  LEWIS. Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.
                       Enter the POST
  POST. My lord ambassador, these letters are for you,
    Sent from your brother, Marquis Montague.
    And, madam, these for you; from whom I know not.
                                   [They all read their letters]
    I hope all's for the best.
  LEWIS. What, has your king married the Lady Grey?
    And now, to soothe your forgery and his,
    And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
    Did I forget that by the house of York
    My father came untimely to his death?
    Did I impale him with the regal crown?
    And am I guerdon'd at the last with shame?
  QUEEN MARGARET. Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love;
    I'll undertake to land them on our coast
    And force the tyrant from his seat by war.
  BONA. Dear brother, how shall Bona be reveng'd
    I'll wear the willow-garland for his sake.
    And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.
    Shall cross the seas and bid false Edward battle:
    Shall waft them over with our royal fleet.
    Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
    I was the chief that rais'd him to the crown,
  GLOUCESTER. Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think you
    Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey?
    Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?
  SOMERSET. My lords, forbear this talk; here comes the King.
      and others. Four stand on one side, and four on the other
  KING EDWARD. Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice
  CLARENCE. As well as Lewis of France or the Earl of Warwick,
    That they'll take no offence at our abuse.
  KING EDWARD. Suppose they take offence without a cause;
  KING EDWARD. Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?
    No, God forbid that I should wish them sever'd
    Whom God hath join'd together; ay, and 'twere pity
    To sunder them that yoke so well together.
    Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
    About the marriage of the Lady Bona.
  MONTAGUE. But the safer when 'tis back'd with France.
    Let us be back'd with God, and with the seas
    And with their helps only defend ourselves.
    In them and in ourselves our safety lies.
    To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.
    To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales
    Unto the brother of your loving bride.
    But in your bride you bury brotherhood.
  CLARENCE. Or else you would not have bestow'd the heir
    Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,
    And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.
    That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.
    To play the broker in mine own behalf;
    And not be tied unto his brother's will.
  KING EDWARD. My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns.
    What danger or what sorrow can befall thee,
    And their true sovereign whom they must obey?
    Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
    Unless they seek for hatred at my hands;
    Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
    And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside] I hear, yet say not much, but think the more.
  KING EDWARD. Go to, we pardon thee; therefore, in brief,
    Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
  MESSENGER. At my depart, these were his very words:
    'Go tell false Edward, the supposed king,
    I'll wear the willow-garland for his sake.'
    She had the wrong. But what said Henry's queen?
    For I have heard that she was there in place.
  KING EDWARD. Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
    But what said Warwick to these injuries?
    Than all the rest, discharg'd me with these words:
    And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.'
  KING EDWARD. Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
    They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.
  MESSENGER. Ay, gracious sovereign; they are so link'd in friendship
  CLARENCE. Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.
    Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
    For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter;
    My thoughts aim at a further matter; I
    Stay not for the love of Edward but the crown.
    Yet am I arm'd against the worst can happen;
    Resolve my doubt. You twain, of all the rest,
    If it be so, then both depart to him:
    I rather wish you foes than hollow friends.
  KING EDWARD. Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?
  KING EDWARD. Why, so! then am I sure of victory.
    Now therefore let us hence, and lose no hour
  WARWICK. Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well;
    Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's brother,
    Thy brother being carelessly encamp'd,
    His soldiers lurking in the towns about,
    Our scouts have found the adventure very easy;
    And brought from thence the Thracian fatal steeds,
    So we, well cover'd with the night's black mantle,
    Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.
    Why then, let's on our way in silent sort.
Enter three WATCHMEN, to guard the KING'S tent
  SECOND WATCHMAN. To-morrow then, belike, shall be the day,
    That with the King here resteth in his tent?
  FIRST WATCHMAN. 'Tis the Lord Hastings, the King's chiefest friend.
  THIRD WATCHMAN. O, is it So? But why commands the King
    While he himself keeps in the cold field?
  SECOND WATCHMAN. 'Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.
  FIRST WATCHMAN. Who goes there?
       WARWICK and the rest cry all 'Warwick! Warwick!' and
      set upon the guard, who fly, crying 'Arm! Arm!' WARWICK
                   and the rest following them
         and the rest, bringing the KING out in his gown,
   sitting in a chair. GLOUCESTER and HASTINGS fly over the stage
  SOMERSET. What are they that fly there?
  WARWICK. Richard and Hastings. Let them go; here is the Duke.
  WARWICK. Ay, but the case is alter'd.
    Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
    Nor how to study for the people's welfare,
  KING EDWARD. Yea, brother of Clarence, art thou here too?
    Nay, then I see that Edward needs must down.
    Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
    My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.
    But Henry now shall wear the English crown
    And be true King indeed; thou but the shadow.
    Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.
    Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.
  WARWICK. Ay, that's the first thing that we have to do;
    And see him seated in the regal throne.               Exeunt
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Why, brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. No, but the loss of his own royal person.
    Either betray'd by falsehood of his guard
    And, as I further have to understand,
    Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
    Fell Warwick's brother, and by that our foe.
    Warwick may lose that now hath won the day.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Till then, fair hope must hinder life's decay.
    And I the rather wean me from despair
    And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
  RIVERS. But, madam, where is Warwick then become?
    To set the crown once more on Henry's head.
    Guess thou the rest: King Edward's friends must down.
    But to prevent the tyrant's violence-
    I'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary
    To save at least the heir of Edward's right.
    Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly:
Enter GLOUCESTER, LORD HASTINGS, SIR WILLIAM STANLEY, and others
    Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither
    Into this chiefest thicket of the park.
    Thus stands the case: you know our King, my brother,
    Is prisoner to the Bishop here, at whose hands
    Under the colour of his usual game,
  HUNTSMAN. This way, my lord; for this way lies the game.
  KING EDWARD. Nay, this way, man. See where the huntsmen stand.
    Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
    Stand you thus close to steal the Bishop's deer?
  GLOUCESTER. Brother, the time and case requireth haste;
    Your horse stands ready at the park corner.
  KING EDWARD. But whither shall we then?
  HASTINGS. To Lynn, my lord; and shipt from thence to Flanders.
  GLOUCESTER. Come then, away; let's ha' no more ado.
  KING EDWARD. Bishop, farewell. Shield thee from Warwick's frown,
    And pray that I may repossess the crown.              Exeunt
    Have shaken Edward from the regal seat
  LIEUTENANT. Subjects may challenge nothing of their sov'reigns;
    I then crave pardon of your Majesty.
    They quite forget their loss of liberty.
    And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee;
    He was the author, thou the instrument.
    And that the people of this blessed land
    Warwick, although my head still wear the crown,
    I here resign my government to thee,
    For few men rightly temper with the stars;
  CLARENCE. No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
    To whom the heav'ns in thy nativity
    And therefore I yield thee my free consent.
  WARWICK. Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content.
    We'll yoke together, like a double shadow
    While he enjoys the honour and his ease.
    And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful
  WARWICK. Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.
  KING HENRY. But, with the first of all your chief affairs,
    For till I see them here, by doubtful fear
  KING HENRY. Come hither, England's hope.
  POST. That Edward is escaped from your brother
    And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
    In secret ambush on the forest side
    And from the Bishop's huntsmen rescu'd him;
  WARWICK. My brother was too careless of his charge.
    So doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts,
    Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
  OXFORD. Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown,
    'Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down.
    Come therefore, let's about it speedily.              Exeunt
  KING EDWARD. Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
    Well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas,
    What then remains, we being thus arriv'd
    From Ravenspurgh haven before the gates of York,
  GLOUCESTER. The gates made fast! Brother, I like not this;
    For many men that stumble at the threshold
    For hither will our friends repair to us.
  HASTINGS. My liege, I'll knock once more to summon them.
         Enter, on the walls, the MAYOR OF YORK and
    And shut the gates for safety of ourselves,
    Yet Edward at the least is Duke of York.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside] But when the fox hath once got in his nose,
    He'll soon find means to make the body follow.
    Open the gates; we are King Henry's friends.
  MAYOR. Ay, say you so? The gates shall then be open'd.
    Both him and all his brothers unto reason.
             Enter, below, the MAYOR and two ALDERMEN
    But in the night or in the time of war.
    What! fear not, man, but yield me up the keys;
    For Edward will defend the town and thee,
  GLOUCESTER. Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,
    Our title to the crown, and only claim
    Our dukedom till God please to send the rest.
    By what safe means the crown may be recover'd.
    To keep them back that come to succour you.
  GLOUCESTER. Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?
  KING EDWARD. When we grow stronger, then we'll make our claim;
    Till then 'tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.
    Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand;
    The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.
    And Henry but usurps the diadem.
  SOLDIER. [Reads] 'Edward the Fourth, by the grace of God,
  ALL. Long live Edward the Fourth!
    And when the morning sun shall raise his car
    Above the border of this horizon,
    Ah, froward Clarence, how evil it beseems the
    To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
    Yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.
    Come on, brave soldiers; doubt not of the day,
    Hath pass'd in safety through the narrow seas
    The knights and gentlemen to come with thee.
    Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
    My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
    Like to his island girt in with the ocean
  OXFORD. [Kissing the KING'S band] And thus I seal my truth and bid
                              Exeunt all but the KING and EXETER
  KING HENRY. Here at the palace will I rest a while.
    Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
  EXETER. The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.
    I have not stopp'd mine ears to their demands,
    Nor posted off their suits with slow delays;
    My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
    My mildness hath allay'd their swelling griefs,
    My mercy dried their water-flowing tears;
    I have not been desirous of their wealth,
    Nor much oppress'd them with great subsidies,
    Nor forward of revenge, though they much err'd.
    Then why should they love Edward more than me?
    No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace;
    And, when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
  EXETER. Hark, hark, my lord! What shouts are these?
  KING EDWARD. Seize on the shame-fac'd Henry, bear him hence;
    You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow.
    Now stops thy spring; my sea shall suck them dry,
    And swell so much the higher by their ebb.
    Hence with him to the Tower: let him not speak.
    And take the great-grown traitor unawares.
Enter WARWICK, the MAYOR OF COVENTRY, two MESSENGERS,
and others upon the walls
  WARWICK. Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
  FIRST MESSENGER. By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.
  WARWICK. How far off is our brother Montague?
    Where is the post that came from Montague?
  KING EDWARD. Go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.
  GLOUCESTER. See how the surly Warwick mans the wall.
    Where slept our scouts or how are they seduc'd
  KING EDWARD. Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
    And he shall pardon thee these outrages.
  WARWICK. Nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
    Confess who set thee up and pluck'd thee down,
    And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.
  GLOUCESTER. I thought, at least, he would have said the King;
    Or did he make the jest against his will?
    I'll do thee service for so good a gift.
  WARWICK. 'Twas I that gave the kingdom to thy brother.
  KING EDWARD. Why then 'tis mine, if but by Warwick's gift.
    What is the body when the head is off?
    But, whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
    The king was slily finger'd from the deck!
    You left poor Henry at the Bishop's palace,
    And ten to one you'll meet him in the Tower.
  GLOUCESTER. Come, Warwick, take the time; kneel down, kneel down.
    Nay, when? Strike now, or else the iron cools.
  WARWICK. I had rather chop this hand off at a blow,
    And with the other fling it at thy face,
    Than bear so low a sail to strike to thee.
    Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood:
                              [He and his forces enter the city]
  KING EDWARD. So other foes may set upon our backs.
    Stand we in good array, for they no doubt
    If not, the city being but of small defence,
    We'll quietly rouse the traitors in the same.
                              [He and his forces enter the city]
  GLOUCESTER. Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
    Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.
  KING EDWARD. The harder match'd, the greater victory.
                              [He and his forces enter the city]
    Have sold their lives unto the house of York;
    And thou shalt be the third, if this sword hold.
    Of force enough to bid his brother battle;
    More than the nature of a brother's love.
  CLARENCE. [Taking the red rose from his hat and throwing
    Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
    Look here, I throw my infamy at thee.
    I will not ruinate my father's house,
    Who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
    To bend the fatal instruments of war
    Against his brother and his lawful King?
    That, to deserve well at my brother's hands,
    With resolution whereso'er I meet thee-
    As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad-
    To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
    And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
    And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.
  GLOUCESTER. Welcome, good Clarence; this is brother-like.
    Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?
    And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou dar'st.
  KING EDWARD. Yes, Warwick, Edward dares and leads the way.
    Lords, to the field; Saint George and victory!
  KING EDWARD. So, lie thou there. Die thou, and die our fear;
    Now, Montague, sit fast; I seek for thee,
    That I must yield my body to the earth
    And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
    Thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge,
    Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle,
    Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
    Have been as piercing as the mid-day sun
    To search the secret treasons of the world;
    Even now we heard the news. Ah, couldst thou fly!
  WARWICK. Why then, I would not fly. Ah, Montague,
    If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand,
    Thou lov'st me not; for, brother, if thou didst,
    And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
    And said 'Commend me to my valiant brother.'
  OXFORD. Away, away, to meet the Queen's great power!
                                  [Here they bear away his body]
Another part of the field
Flourish. Enter KING in triumph; with GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and the rest
    But in the midst of this bright-shining day
    I mean, my lords, those powers that the Queen
    And blow it to the source from whence it came;
    If she have time to breathe, be well assur'd
    That they do hold their course toward Tewksbury;
    We, having now the best at Barnet field,
    Will thither straight, for willingness rids way;
    Strike up the drum; cry 'Courage!' and away.          Exeunt
  QUEEN MARGARET. Great lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their
    But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
    What though the mast be now blown overboard,
    The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
    And half our sailors swallow'd in the flood;
    Should leave the helm and, like a fearful lad,
    With tearful eyes add water to the sea
    Whiles, in his moan, the ship splits on the rock,
    Our slaught'red friends the tackles; what of these?
    Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
    And Somerset another goodly mast?
    For once allow'd the skilful pilot's charge?
    We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
    But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
    As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
    All these the enemies to our poor bark.
    Tread on the sand; why, there you quickly sink.
    Bestride the rock; the tide will wash you off,
    That there's no hop'd-for mercy with the brothers
    Why, courage then! What cannot be avoided
    Should, if a coward hear her speak these words,
    Lest in our need he might infect another
    And make him of the like spirit to himself.
    O brave young Prince! thy famous grandfather
    Doth live again in thee. Long mayst thou Eve
    Go home to bed and, like the owl by day,
    Ready to fight; therefore be resolute.
  KING EDWARD. Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood
    Which, by the heavens' assistance and your strength,
    Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
    For well I wot ye blaze to burn them out.
    Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords.
    Ye see, I drink the water of my eye.
    Is prisoner to the foe; his state usurp'd,
    And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.
    Be valiant, and give signal to the fight.
Another part of the field
    Go, bear them hence; I will not hear them speak.
  OXFORD. For my part, I'll not trouble thee with words.
  KING EDWARD. Bring forth the gallant; let us hear him speak.
    And all the trouble thou hast turn'd me to?
    Suppose that I am now my father's mouth;
    Whilst I propose the self-same words to the
  QUEEN MARGARET. Ah, that thy father had been so resolv'd!
  GLOUCESTER. That you might still have worn the petticoat
    And ne'er have stol'n the breech from Lancaster.
  PRINCE OF WALES. Nay, take away this scolding crookback rather.
    And thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.
  KING EDWARD. Take that, the likeness of this railer here.
  CLARENCE. And there's for twitting me with perjury.
  GLOUCESTER. Why should she live to fill the world with words?
  GLOUCESTER. Clarence, excuse me to the King my brother.
    Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.
  GLOUCESTER. The Tower! the Tower!                         Exit
  QUEEN MARGARET. O Ned, sweet Ned, speak to thy mother, boy!
    And men ne'er spend their fury on a child.
    The thought of them would have stirr'd up remorse.
    Here sheathe thy sword; I'll pardon thee my death.
  CLARENCE. By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.
    To make a bloody supper in the Tower.
    Now march we hence. Discharge the common sort
Enter KING HENRY and GLOUCESTER with the LIEUTENANT, on the walls
  KING HENRY. Ay, my good lord- my lord, I should say rather.
    And both preposterous; therefore, not 'good lord.'
  KING HENRY. So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf;
    So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece,
    And next his throat unto the butcher's knife.
  GLOUCESTER. Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind:
    And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,
    Have now the fatal object in my eye
    That taught his son the office of a fowl!
    And yet, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.
    Thy father, Minos, that denied our course;
    The sun that sear'd the wings of my sweet boy,
    Thy brother Edward; and thyself, the sea
    Why, then thou are an executioner.
    Men for their sons, wives for their husbands,
    Orphans for their parents' timeless death-
    Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
    The raven rook'd her on the chimney's top,
    Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
    And yet brought forth less than a mother's hope,
    Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
    To signify thou cam'st to bite the world;
    And if the rest be true which I have heard,
    For this, amongst the rest, was I ordain'd.
    O, God forgive my sins and pardon thee!               [Dies]
  GLOUCESTER. What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
    Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
    See how my sword weeps for the poor King's death.
    From those that wish the downfall of our house!
    Down, down to hell; and say I sent thee thither-
    I, that have neither pity, love, nor fear.
    For I have often heard my mother say
    I came into the world with my legs forward.
    And seek their ruin that usurp'd our right?
    The midwife wonder'd; and the women cried
    That I should snarl, and bite, and play the dog.
    Then, since the heavens have shap'd my body so,
    I have no brother, I am like no brother;
    Be resident in men like one another,
    Clarence, beware; thou keep'st me from the light,
    But I will sort a pitchy day for thee;
    And then to purge his fear, I'll be thy death.
    King Henry and the Prince his son are gone.
    Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest;
    I'll throw thy body in another room,
                                              Exit with the body
HASTINGS, NURSE, with the Young PRINCE, and attendants
    Repurchas'd with the blood of enemies.
    Have we mow'd down in tops of all their pride!
    Two Cliffords, as the father and the son;
    Ne'er spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet's sound;
    With them the two brave bears, Warwick and Montague,
    That in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion
    And made the forest tremble when they roar'd.
    Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.
    Young Ned, for thee thine uncles and myself
    Have in our armours watch'd the winter's night,
    That thou might'st repossess the crown in peace;
    And of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.
    For yet I am not look'd on in the world.
    Work thou the way- and that shall execute.
    And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.
    I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.
  KING EDWARD. Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks.
  GLOUCESTER. And that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st,
    Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.
    [Aside] To say the truth, so Judas kiss'd his master
    Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.
    Reignier, her father, to the King of France
    Hath pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem,
    And hither have they sent it for her ransom.
    And now what rests but that we spend the time
    Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
  CAPUCIUS, Ambassador from the Emperor Charles V
  DOCTOR BUTTS, physician to the King
  SURVEYOR to the Duke of Buckingham
  DOORKEEPER Of the Council chamber
  Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Lords and Ladies in the Dumb
       Shows; Women attending upon the Queen; Scribes,
       Officers, Guards, and other Attendants; Spirits
    Such noble scenes as draw the eye to flow,
    May, if they think it well, let fall a tear:
    Their money out of hope they may believe
    The play may pass, if they be still and willing,
    I'll undertake may see away their shilling
    Richly in two short hours. Only they
    Our own brains, and the opinion that we bring
    The first and happiest hearers of the town,
    As they were living; think you see them great,
    And follow'd with the general throng and sweat
    Of thousand friends; then, in a moment, see
    And if you can be merry then, I'll say
Enter the DUKE OF NORFOLK at one door; at the other,
the DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM and the LORD ABERGAVENNY
    Of what I saw there.
    Met in the vale of Andren.
    I was then present, saw them salute on horseback;
    Beheld them, when they lighted, how they clung
    In their embracement, as they grew together;
    Which had they, what four thron'd ones could have weigh'd
  BUCKINGHAM. All the whole time
    Became the next day's master, till the last
    Made former wonders its. To-day the French,
    All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
    Shone down the English; and to-morrow they
    As cherubins, an gilt; the madams too,
    The pride upon them, that their very labour
    Was to them as a painting. Now this masque
    As presence did present them: him in eye
    'Twas said they saw but one, and no discerner
    Durst wag his tongue in censure. When these suns-
    For so they phrase 'em-by their heralds challeng'd
    The noble spirits to arms, they did perform
    In honour honesty, the tract of ev'rything
    To the disposing of it nought rebell'd;
    I mean, who set the body and the limbs
    Of this great sport together, as you guess?
  NORFOLK. All this was ord'red by the good discretion
    Of the right reverend Cardinal of York.
    To do in these fierce vanities? I wonder
    Take up the rays o' th' beneficial sun,
    And keep it from the earth.
    There's in him stuff that puts him to these ends;
    Chalks successors their way, nor call'd upon
    For high feats done to th' crown, neither allied
    A place next to the King.
    If not from hell, the devil is a niggard
  BUCKINGHAM. Why the devil,
    Without the privity o' th' King-t' appoint
    Who should attend on him? He makes up the file
    Of all the gentry; for the most part such
    Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have
    By this so sicken'd their estates that never
    Have broke their backs with laying manors on 'em
    The peace between the French and us not values
    After the hideous storm that follow'd, was
    Dashing the garment of this peace, aboded
    For France hath flaw'd the league, and hath attach'd
  ABERGAVENNY. Is it therefore
    The state takes notice of the private difference
    Betwixt you and the Cardinal. I advise you-
    Together; to consider further, that
    Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel
      Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, the purse borne before
      him, certain of the guard, and two SECRETARIES
  WOLSEY. Well, we shall then know more, and Buckingham
    Have not the power to muzzle him; therefore best
  BUCKINGHAM. I'll to the King,
    The fire that mounts the liquor till't run o'er
    I say again there is no English soul
    If with the sap of reason you would quench
    Or but allay the fire of passion.
    Whom from the flow of gan I name not, but
    Infecting one another, yea, reciprocally-
    As here at home, suggests the King our master
    As himself pleas'd; and they were ratified
    To th' old dam treason: Charles the Emperor,
    Under pretence to see the Queen his aunt-
    His fears were that the interview betwixt
    England and France might through their amity
    Which I do well, for I am sure the Emperor
    Ere it was ask'd-but when the way was made,
    And pav'd with gold, the Emperor thus desir'd,
    That he would please to alter the King's course,
    And break the foresaid peace. Let the King know,
    As soon he shall by me, that thus the Cardinal
              and two or three of the guard
    My lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl
    Arrest thee of high treason, in the name
    How he determines further.
  ABERGAVENNY. As the Duke said,
    The will of heaven be done, and the King's pleasure
    The King t' attach Lord Montacute and the bodies
    Of the Duke's confessor, John de la Car,
    These are the limbs o' th' plot; no more, I hope.
    I am the shadow of poor Buckingham,
Cornets. Enter KING HENRY, leaning on the CARDINAL'S shoulder, the NOBLES,
and SIR THOMAS LOVELL, with others. The CARDINAL places himself
under the KING'S feet on his right side
  KING. My life itself, and the best heart of it,
    And point by point the treasons of his master
      A noise within, crying 'Room for the Queen!'
      Enter the QUEEN, usher'd by the DUKES OF NORFOLK
    The other moiety ere you ask is given;
    The dignity of your office, is the point
    Are in great grievance: there have been commissions
    Sent down among 'em which hath flaw'd the heart
    Of all their loyalties; wherein, although,
    My good Lord Cardinal, they vent reproaches
    Of these exactions, yet the King our master-
    It doth appear; for, upon these taxations,
    The many to them 'longing, have put of
    Unfit for other life, compell'd by hunger
    And lack of other means, in desperate manner
    And danger serves among them.
    Where others tell steps with me.
    You know no more than others! But you frame
    To those which would not know them, and yet must
    Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions,
    Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are
    Without delay; and the pretence for this
    Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze
    Allegiance in them; their curses now
    Live where their prayers did; and it's come to pass
    I have no further gone in this than by
    By learned approbation of the judges. If I am
    Traduc'd by ignorant tongues, which neither know
    'Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake
    Our necessary actions in the fear
    That is new-trimm'd, but benefit no further
    And with a care exempt themselves from fear:
    Things done without example, in their issue
    And stick them in our will. Sixth part of each?
    The air will drink the sap. To every county
  WOLSEY. [Aside to the SECRETARY]  A word with you.
    Let there be letters writ to every shire
    Of the King's grace and pardon. The grieved commons
    Further in the proceeding.                         Exit SECRETARY
  QUEEN KATHARINE. I am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham
    When these so noble benefits shall prove
    Not well dispos'd, the mind growing once corrupt,
    Than ever they were fair. This man so complete,
    Hath into monstrous habits put the graces
    Out of the Duke of Buckingham.
    It would infect his speech-that if the King
    To make the sceptre his. These very words
    Revenge upon the Cardinal.
    How grounded he his title to the crown
    The Duke being at the Rose, within the parish
    What was the speech among the Londoners
    Concerning the French journey. I replied
    Men fear'd the French would prove perfidious,
    To the King's danger. Presently the Duke
    Said 'twas the fear indeed and that he doubted
    'Twould prove the verity of certain words
    Whom after under the confession's seal
    This pausingly ensu'd: "Neither the King nor's heirs,
    Tell you the Duke, shall prosper; bid him strive
    To gain the love o' th' commonalty; the Duke
    You were the Duke's surveyor, and lost your office
    On the complaint o' th' tenants. Take good heed
    I told my lord the Duke, by th' devil's illusions
    It can do me no damage'; adding further
    That, had the King in his last sickness fail'd,
    There's mischief in this man. Canst thou say further?
    After your Highness had reprov'd the Duke
    As to the Tower I thought-I would have play'd
    The part my father meant to act upon
  KING. There's something more would out of thee: what say'st?
  SURVEYOR. After 'the Duke his father' with the 'knife,'
    Another spread on's breast, mounting his eyes,
    His father by as much as a performance
    Find mercy in the law, 'tis his; if none,
Enter the LORD CHAMBERLAIN and LORD SANDYS
  CHAMBERLAIN. Is't possible the spells of France should juggle
    Though they be never so ridiculous,
  CHAMBERLAIN. As far as I see, all the good our English
    Have got by the late voyage is but merely
    A fit or two o' th' face; but they are shrewd ones;
    For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly
    To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so.
    That never saw 'em pace before, the spavin
    Their clothes are after such a pagan cut to't,
    I hear of none but the new proclamation
    That's clapp'd upon the court gate.
    That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors.
  CHAMBERLAIN. I am glad 'tis there. Now I would pray our monsieurs
    And never see the Louvre.
  LOVELL. They must either,
    For so run the conditions, leave those remnants
    Of fool and feather that they got in France,
    With all their honourable points of ignorance
    Pertaining thereunto-as fights and fireworks;
    Abusing better men than they can be,
    The faith they have in tennis, and tall stockings,
    Or pack to their old playfellows. There, I take it,
    The lag end of their lewdness and be laugh'd at.
  SANDYS. 'Tis time to give 'em physic, their diseases
    Will have of these trim vanities!
    There will be woe indeed, lords: the sly whoresons
  SANDYS. The devil fiddle 'em! I am glad they are going,
    For sure there's no converting 'em. Now
    Whither were you a-going?
  LOVELL. To the Cardinal's;
    To many lords and ladies; there will be
    A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us;
    He had a black mouth that said other of him.
  CHAMBERLAIN. True, they are so;
Hautboys. A small table under a state for the Cardinal,
a longer table for the guests. Then enter ANNE BULLEN,
and divers other LADIES and GENTLEMEN, as guests, at one door;
at another door enter SIR HENRY GUILDFORD
  SANDYS. Sir Thomas Lovell, had the Cardinal
    But half my lay thoughts in him, some of these
    Should find a running banquet ere they rested
    To one or two of these!
    Place you that side; I'll take the charge of this.
    Two women plac'd together makes cold weather.
    Pray sit between these ladies.
                 [Seats himself between ANNE BULLEN and another lady]
    I had it from my father.
    The penance lies on you if these fair ladies
    In their fair cheeks, my lord; then we shall have 'em
  SANDYS. I told your Grace they would talk anon.
  CHAMBERLAIN. Look out there, some of ye.             Exit a SERVANT
    By all the laws of war y'are privileg'd.
    For so they seem. Th' have left their barge and landed,
    And hither make, as great ambassadors
    Go, give 'em welcome; you can speak the French tongue;
    Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.
      Hautboys. Enter the KING, and others, as maskers,
      habited like shepherds, usher'd by the LORD CHAMBERLAIN.
      They pass directly before the CARDINAL,
    A noble company! What are their pleasures?
  CHAMBERLAIN. Because they speak no English, thus they pray'd
    This night to meet here, they could do no less,
    Out of the great respect they bear to beauty,
    But leave their flocks and, under your fair conduct,
    Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat
    A thousand thanks, and pray 'em take their pleasures.
    Till now I never knew thee!                        [Music. Dance]
                                         [He whispers to the maskers]
  WOLSEY. What say they?
  CHAMBERLAIN. Such a one, they all confess,
    There is indeed; which they would have your Grace
  WOLSEY. Let me see, then.                    [Comes from his state]
    Prithee come hither: what fair lady's that?
  WOLSEY. Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready
    In the next chamber.
    To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure
    To lead 'em once again; and then let's dream
    Who's best in favour. Let the music knock it.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Whither away so fast?
    Ev'n to the Hall, to hear what shall become
    Of the great Duke of Buckingham.
    That labour, sir. All's now done but the ceremony
    Of bringing back the prisoner.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Were you there?
    Came to the bar; where to his accusations
    Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.
    The King's attorney, on the contrary,
    Urg'd on the examinations, proofs, confessions,
    Of divers witnesses; which the Duke desir'd
    All these accus'd him strongly, which he fain
    Was either pitied in him or forgotten.
    In all the rest show'd a most noble patience.
    He never was so womanish; the cause
    The Cardinal is the end of this.
    Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too,
    Lest he should help his father.
    And generally: whoever the King favours
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. All the commons
      before him; the axe with the edge towards him; halberds
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Stay there, sir,
    And see the noble ruin'd man you speak of.
    Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.
    Even as the axe falls, if I be not faithful!
    'T has done, upon the premises, but justice.
    Be what they will, I heartily forgive 'em;
    Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief
    Nor build their evils on the graves of great men,
    For then my guiltless blood must cry against 'em.
    For further life in this world I ne'er hope
    Nor will I sue, although the King have mercies
    And as the long divorce of steel falls on me
    Yet are the King's, and, till my soul forsake,
  VAUX. Prepare there;
    The Duke is coming; see the barge be ready;
    When I came hither I was Lord High Constable
    My noble father, Henry of Buckingham,
    Henry the Seventh succeeding, truly pitying
    My father's loss, like a most royal prince,
    Henry the Eighth, life, honour, name, and all
    For ever from the world. I had my trial,
    A little happier than my wretched father;
    And give your hearts to, when they once perceive
    But where they mean to sink ye. All good people,
    Pray for me! I must now forsake ye; the last hour
    I fear, too many curses on their heads
    That were the authors.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. If the Duke be guiltless,
    Between the King and Katharine?
    For when the King once heard it, out of anger
    He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight
    To stop the rumour and allay those tongues
    The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinal
    To the good Queen, possess'd him with a scruple
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. 'Tis the Cardinal;
    And merely to revenge him on the Emperor
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. I think you have hit the mark; but is't
    That she should feel the smart of this? The Cardinal
Enter the LORD CHAMBERLAIN reading this letter
    'The horses your lordship sent for, with all the care
    young and handsome, and of the best breed in the north.
    When they were ready to set out for London, a man of
    before a subject, if not before the King; which stopp'd
    I fear he will indeed. Well, let him have them.
    Enter to the LORD CHAMBERLAIN the DUKES OF NORFOLK and SUFFOLK
  SUFFOLK. How is the King employ'd?
  NORFOLK. What's the cause?
  CHAMBERLAIN. It seems the marriage with his brother's wife
    Has crept too near another lady.
    This is the Cardinal's doing; the King-Cardinal,
    That blind priest, like the eldest son of fortune,
    And with what zeal! For, now he has crack'd the league
    Between us and the Emperor, the Queen's great nephew,
    He dives into the King's soul and there scatters
    Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience,
    Fears, and despairs-and all these for his marriage;
    And out of all these to restore the King,
    That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls,
    Will bless the King-and is not this course pious?
    Look into these affairs see this main end-
    I love him not, nor fear him-there's my creed;
    If the King please; his curses and his blessings
    To him that made him proud-the Pope.
    And with some other business put the King
    From these sad thoughts that work too much upon him.
    The King has sent me otherwhere; besides,
                            Exit LORD CHAMBERLAIN; and the KING draws
                               the curtain and sits reading pensively
  KING. Who's there, ha?
  KING HENRY. Who's there, I say? How dare you thrust yourselves
    Who's there? My good Lord Cardinal? O my Wolsey,
  SUFFOLK.  [Aside to NORFOLK]  I another.
    Your scruple to the voice of Christendom.
    Must now confess, if they have any goodness,
    The trial just and noble. All the clerks,
    I mean the learned ones, in Christian kingdoms
    Have their free voices. Rome the nurse of judgment,
    And thank the holy conclave for their loves.
    Cardinal of York, are join'd with me their servant
    In the unpartial judging of this business.
  KING. Ay, and the best she shall have; and my favour
    Prithee call Gardiner to me, my new secretary;
    You are the King's now.
  KING. Come hither, Gardiner.                   [Walks and whispers]
  CAMPEIUS. Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread then,
    I will have none so near else. Learn this, brother,
  ANNE. Not for that neither. Here's the pang that pinches:
    So many courses of the sun enthroned,
    Still growing in a majesty and pomp, the which
    To give her the avaunt, it is a pity
    It from the bearer, 'tis a sufferance panging
  ANNE. So much the more
    Saving your mincing, the capacity
  ANNE. No, not for all the riches under heaven.
    For all the world.
    Would for Carnarvonshire, although there long'd
         Enter the LORD CHAMBERLAIN
    The action of good women; there is hope
    Ta'en of your many virtues, the King's Majesty
    I shall not fail t' approve the fair conceit
    That they have caught the King; and who knows yet
    To lighten all this isle?-I'll to the King
    For all the mud in Egypt. Have you heard it?
  OLD LADY. With your theme I could
    O'ermount the lark. The Marchioness of Pembroke!
    No other obligation! By my life,
next them, two SCRIBES, in the habit of doctors; after them,
the ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY alone; after him, the BISHOPS OF LINCOLN, ELY,
ROCHESTER, and SAINT ASAPH; next them, with some small distance,
follows a GENTLEMAN bearing the purse, with the great seal,
and a Cardinal's hat; then two PRIESTS, bearing each silver cross;
then a GENTLEMAN USHER bareheaded, accompanied with a SERGEANT-AT-ARMS
bearing a silver mace; then two GENTLEMEN bearing two great silver pillars;
after them, side by side, the two CARDINALS, WOLSEY and CAMPEIUS;
two NOBLEMEN with the sword and mace. Then enter the KING and QUEEN
and their trains. The KING takes place under the cloth of state;
the two CARDINALS sit under him as judges. The QUEEN takes place
some distance from the KING. The BISHOPS place themselves on each side
of the court, in manner of consistory; below them the SCRIBES.
The LORDS sit next the BISHOPS. The rest of the attendants stand
in convenient order about the stage
  KING. What's the need?
    You may then spare that time.
  SCRIBE. Say 'Henry King of England, come into the court.'
  SCRIBE. Say 'Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.'
     goes about the court, comes to the KING, and kneels
     at his feet; then speaks
    As I saw it inclin'd. When was the hour
    He was from thence discharg'd? Sir, call to mind
    With many children by you. If, in the course
    Turn me away and let the foul'st contempt
    To the sharp'st kind of justice. Please you, sir,
    The King, your father, was reputed for
    My father, King of Spain, was reckon'd one
    The wisest prince that there had reign'd by many
    That they had gather'd a wise council to them
    And of your choice, these reverend fathers-men
    Yea, the elect o' th' land, who are assembled
    To plead your cause. It shall be therefore bootless
    That longer you desire the court, as well
    What is unsettled in the King.
    Hath spoken well and justly; therefore, madam,
    And that, without delay, their arguments
    Or how far further shall, is warranted
    By a commission from the Consistory,
    Yea, the whole Consistory of Rome. You charge me
    It lies to cure me, and the cure is to
    Remove these thoughts from you; the which before
    Yourself pronounce their office. I must tell you
    Before you all, appeal unto the Pope,
                     [She curtsies to the KING, and offers to depart]
  CRIER. Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.
    When you are call'd, return. Now the Lord help!
    In any of their courts.           Exeunt QUEEN and her attendants
    Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out-
    Of all these ears-for where I am robb'd and bound,
    There must I be unloos'd, although not there
    At once and fully satisfied-whether ever I
    Induce you to the question on't, or ever
    A royal lady, spake one the least word that might
    Be to the prejudice of her present state,
    Why they are so, but, like to village curs,
    Bark when their fellows do. By some of these
    Have wish'd the sleeping of this business; never desir'd
    By th' Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador,
    Who had been hither sent on the debating
    A marriage 'twixt the Duke of Orleans and
    I mean the Bishop-did require a respite
    Wherein he might the King his lord advertise
    Whether our daughter were legitimate,
    Respecting this our marriage with the dowager,
    Sometimes our brother's wife. This respite shook
    I stood not in the smile of heaven, who had
    The grave does to the dead; for her male issue
    Or died where they were made, or shortly after
    This world had air'd them. Hence I took a thought
    Well worthy the best heir o' th' world, should not
    I weigh'd the danger which my realms stood in
    Now present here together; that's to say
    I then did feel full sick, and yet not well,
    By all the reverend fathers of the land
  KING. I then mov'd you,
    Under your hands and seals; therefore, go on,
    For no dislike i' th' world against the person
    Of the good Queen, but the sharp thorny points
    Katharine our queen, before the primest creature
    That we adjourn this court till further day;
    Made to the Queen to call back her appeal
    Prithee return. With thy approach I know
    My comfort comes along. -Break up the court;
    I say, set on.                   Exuent in manner as they entered
Enter the QUEEN and her women, as at work
        And the mountain tops that freeze,
          Bow themselves when he did sing;
        Even the billows of the sea,
          Hung their heads and then lay by.
  GENTLEMAN. An't please your Grace, the two great Cardinals
    Wait in the presence.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Would they speak with me?
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Pray their Graces
    To come near. [Exit GENTLEMAN] What can be their business
    I do not like their coming. Now I think on't,
    They should be good men, their affairs as righteous;
         Enter the two CARDINALS, WOLSEY and CAMPEIUS
    I would be all, against the worst may happen.
    Deserves a corner. Would all other women
    As not to know the language I have liv'd in;
    If you speak truth, for their poor mistress' sake:
    We come not by the way of accusation
    How you stand minded in the weighty difference
    Between the King and you, and to deliver,
    Either for such men or such business.
  WOLSEY. Madam, you wrong the King's love with these fears;
    They are, as all my other comforts, far hence,
  CAMPEIUS. Put your main cause into the King's protection;
    For if the trial of the law o'ertake ye
    Heaven is above all yet: there sits a Judge
    You turn the good we offer into envy.
    And all the fellowship I hold now with him
    Still met the King, lov'd him next heav'n, obey'd him,
  WOLSEY. Madam, you wander from the good we aim at.
    Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it!
    I am the most unhappy woman living.
    Almost no grave allow'd me. Like the My,
    That once was mistress of the field, and flourish'd,
    Grow from the King's acquaintance, by this carriage.
    So much they love it; but to stubborn spirits
    With these weak women's fears. A noble spirit,
    While I shall have my life. Come, reverend fathers,
Enter the DUKE OF NORFOLK, the DUKE OF SUFFOLK, the EARL OF SURREY,
and the LORD CHAMBERLAIN
    And force them with a constancy, the Cardinal
    Cannot stand under them: if you omit
    With these you bear already.
    To meet the least occasion that may give me
    Remembrance of my father-in-law, the Duke,
  SUFFOLK. Which of the peers
    What we can do to him-though now the time
    Over the King in's tongue.
    His spell in that is out; the King hath found
    In the divorce his contrary proceedings
  SUFFOLK. The Cardinal's letters to the Pope miscarried,
    How that the Cardinal did entreat his Holiness
    To stay the judgment o' th' divorce; for if
    A creature of the Queen's, Lady Anne Bullen.'
  SURREY. Has the King this?
    After his patient's death: the King already
    Hath married the fair lady.
    Trace the conjunction!
  SURREY. But will the King
    Digest this letter of the Cardinal's?
    Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius
    Has left the cause o' th' King unhandled, and
    Is posted, as the agent of our Cardinal,
    Have satisfied the King for his divorce,
    Together with all famous colleges
    In the King's business.
    Gave't you the King?
  WOLSEY. Look'd he o' th' inside of the paper?
    He did unseal them; and the first he view'd,
    [Aside]  It shall be to the Duchess of Alencon,
  SUFFOLK. May be he hears the King
    A spleeny Lutheran; and not wholesome to
    Our hard-rul'd King. Again, there is sprung up
    Hath crawl'd into the favour of the King,
        Enter the KING, reading of a schedule, and LOVELL
  SURREY. I would 'twere something that would fret the string,
  SUFFOLK. The King, the King!
    Does he rake this together?-Now, my lords,
    Saw you the Cardinal?
    Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
    Springs out into fast gait; then stops again,
    His eye against the moon. In most strange postures
    Some spirit put this paper in the packet
    His contemplation were above the earth
    His thinkings are below the moon, not worth
                                           who goes to the CARDINAL]
    You are full of heavenly stuff, and bear the inventory
    Of your best graces in your mind; the which
    To have you therein my companion.
    To think upon the part of business which
  WOLSEY. And ever may your Highness yoke together,
    And yet words are no deeds. My father lov'd you:
    The prime man of the state? I pray you tell me
    Have been mine so that evermore they pointed
    The profit of the state. For your great graces
    Therein illustrated; the honour of it
    Does pay the act of it, as, i' th' contrary,
    The foulness is the punishment. I presume
    Though all the world should crack their duty to you,
    And throw it from their soul; though perils did
    As doth a rock against the chiding flood,
    Should the approach of this wild river break,
    And after, this; and then to breakfast with
                Exit the KING, frowning upon the CARDINAL; the NOBLES
    Leap'd from his eyes; so looks the chafed lion
    Upon the daring huntsman that has gall'd him-
    I fear, the story of his anger. 'Tis so;
    Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together
    For mine own ends; indeed to gain the popedom,
    Made me put this main secret in the packet
    I sent the King? Is there no way to cure this?
    The letter, as I live, with all the business
    I writ to's Holiness. Nay then, farewell!
    I have touch'd the highest point of all my greatness,
    Like a bright exhalation in the evening,
        Re-enter to WOLSEY the DUKES OF NORFOLK and
        SUFFOLK, the EARL OF SURREY, and the LORD
  NORFOLK. Hear the King's pleasure, Cardinal, who commands you
    To render up the great seal presently
    Till you hear further from his Highness.
    Bearing the King's will from his mouth expressly?
    In time will find their fit rewards. That seal
    You ask with such a violence, the King-
    Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honours,
  WOLSEY. It must be himself then.
    Within these forty hours Surrey durst better
    Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law.
    The heads of all thy brother cardinals,
    With thee and all thy best parts bound together,
    Far from his succour, from the King, from all
    That might have mercy on the fault thou gav'st him;
    That in the way of loyalty and truth
    Toward the King, my ever royal master,
    My sword i' the life-blood of thee else. My lords
    Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one,
    You writ to th' Pope against the King; your goodness,
    As you respect the common good, the state
    Produce the grand sum of his sins, the articles
    Worse than the sacring bell, when the brown wench
  NORFOLK. Those articles, my lord, are in the King's hand;
    But, thus much, they are foul ones.
    When the King knows my truth.
    Some of these articles; and out they shall.
  SURREY. I had rather want those than my head. Have at you!
    First, that without the King's assent or knowledge
    You maim'd the jurisdiction of all bishops.
    Was still inscrib'd; in which you brought the King
  SUFFOLK. Then, that without the knowledge
    Either of King or Council, when you went
    Ambassador to the Emperor, you made bold
    To carry into Flanders the great seal.
    Without the King's will or the state's allowance,
    Your holy hat to be stamp'd on the King's coin.
    To furnish Rome and to prepare the ways
    You have for dignities, to the mere undoing
    Of all the kingdom. Many more there are,
    Which, since they are of you, and odious,
    His faults lie open to the laws; let them,
  SUFFOLK. Lord Cardinal, the King's further pleasure is-
    That therefore such a writ be sued against you:
    Out of the King's protection. This is my charge.
    About the giving back the great seal to us,
  WOLSEY. So farewell to the little good you bear me.
    This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth
    And then he falls, as I do. I have ventur'd,
    Weary and old with service, to the mercy
    That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin
    I humbly thank his Grace; and from these shoulders,
  CROMWELL. The heaviest and the worst
    Is your displeasure with the King.
  CROMWELL. Last, that the Lady Anne,
    Whom the King hath in secrecy long married,
    Going to chapel; and the voice is now
  WOLSEY. There was the weight that pull'd me down.
    Or gild again the noble troops that waited
    Upon my smiles. Go get thee from me, Cromwell;
    To be thy lord and master. Seek the King;
    What and how true thou art. He will advance thee;
    Must I then leave you? Must I needs forgo
    Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
    Of me more must be heard of, say I taught thee-
    Say Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory,
    And sounded all the depths and shoals of honour,
    Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in-
    Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition:
    By that sin fell the angels. How can man then,
    Love thyself last; cherish those hearts that hate thee;
    Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,
    Thy God's, and truth's; then, if thou fall'st, O Cromwell,
    Serve the King, and-prithee lead me in.
    To the last penny; 'tis the King's. My robe,
    Had I but serv'd my God with half the zeal
Enter two GENTLEMEN, meeting one another
    I am sure, have shown at full their royal minds-
    As, let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward-
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Yes; 'tis the list
    Of those that claim their offices this day,
    By custom of the coronation.
    The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
    To be High Steward; next, the Duke of Norfolk,
    He to be Earl Marshal. You may read the rest.
    Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
    Learned and reverend fathers of his order,
    From Ampthill, where the Princess lay; to which
    She was often cited by them, but appear'd not.
    The King's late scruple, by the main assent
    Of all these learned men, she was divorc'd,
    And the late marriage made of none effect;
    The trumpets sound. Stand close, the Queen is coming.
    5. MAYOR OF LONDON, bearing the mace. Then GARTER, in
       demi-coronal of gold. With him, the EARL OF SURREY,
       bearing the rod of silver with the dove, crowned with an
       With him, the DUKE OF NORFOLK, with the rod of
    8. A canopy borne by four of the CINQUE-PORTS; under it
       the QUEEN in her robe; in her hair richly adorned with
       pearl, crowned. On each side her, the BISHOPS OF LONDON
       wrought with flowers, bearing the QUEEN'S train.
             Exeunt, first passing over the stage in order and state,
                                and then a great flourish of trumpets
    Who's that that bears the sceptre?
    And that the Earl of Surrey, with the rod.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. 'Tis the same-High Steward.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.  [Looking on the QUEEN]  Heaven
      bless thee!
    Thou hast the sweetest face I ever look'd on.
    Our king has all the Indies in his arms,
    Of the Cinque-ports.
    I take it she that carries up the train
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. It is; and all the rest are countesses.
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Among the crowds i' th' Abbey, where a finger
    With the mere rankness of their joy.
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Well worth the seeing.
    Of lords and ladies, having brought the Queen
    To a prepar'd place in the choir, fell of
    The beauty of her person to the people.
    Believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman
    That ever lay by man; which when the people
    Had the full view of, such a noise arose
    As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest,
    Doublets, I think-flew up, and had their faces
    Been loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy
    In the old time of war, would shake the press,
    Could say 'This is my wife' there, all were woven
    Came to the altar, where she kneel'd, and saintlike
    Then rose again, and bow'd her to the people;
    When by the Archbishop of Canterbury
    She had all the royal makings of a queen:
    Laid nobly on her; which perform'd, the choir,
    With all the choicest music of the kingdom,
    Together sung 'Te Deum.' So she parted,
    And with the same full state pac'd back again
    To York Place, where the feast is held.
    For since the Cardinal fell that title's lost.
    'Tis now the King's, and called Whitehall.
    But 'tis so lately alter'd that the old name
    Were those that went on each side of the Queen?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Stokesly and Gardiner: the one of Winchester,
    Newly preferr'd from the King's secretary;
    The other, London.
    Is held no great good lover of the Archbishop's,
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. All the land knows that;
    However, yet there is no great breach. When it comes,
    And one, already, of the Privy Council.
    Is to th' court, and there ye shall be my guests:
    Something I can command. As I walk thither,
    Willing to leave their burden. Reach a chair.
    That the great child of honour, Cardinal Wolsey,
    Out of the pain you suffer'd, gave no ear to't.
  KATHARINE. Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died.
  GRIFFITH. Well, the voice goes, madam;
    For after the stout Earl Northumberland
    Lodg'd in the abbey; where the reverend abbot,
    To whom he gave these words: 'O father Abbot,
    An old man, broken with the storms of state,
    About the hour of eight-which he himself
    He gave his honours to the world again,
    Tied all the kingdom. Simony was fair play;
    His promises were, as he then was, mighty;
    Men's evil manners live in brass: their virtues
    Lofty and sour to them that lov'd him not,
    Unwilling to outlive the good that did it;
    The other, though unfinish'd, yet so famous,
    For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
    And found the blessedness of being little.
  KATHARINE. After my death I wish no other herald,
    No other speaker of my living actions,
    I have not long to trouble thee. Good Griffith,
    Cause the musicians play me that sad note
      Enter, solemnly tripping one after another, six
      PERSONAGES clad in white robes, wearing on their
      heads garlands of bays, and golden vizards on their
      faces; branches of bays or palm in their hands. They
      first congee unto her, then dance; and, at certain
      changes, the first two hold a spare garland over her
      head, at which the other four make reverent curtsies.
      Then the two that held the garland deliver the
      same to the other next two, who observe the same
      order in their changes, and holding the garland over
      her head; which done, they deliver the same garland
      to the last two, who likewise observe the same order;
      hands to heaven. And so in their dancing vanish,
      carrying the garland with them. The music continues
    Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun?
  KATHARINE. Bid the music leave,
    How much her Grace is alter'd on the sudden?
    A gentleman, sent from the King, to see you.
    You should be Lord Ambassador from the Emperor,
  CAPUCIUS. Madam, the same-your servant.
    First, mine own service to your Grace; the next,
    Banish'd the kingdom! Patience, is that letter
    This to my lord the King.
    To love her for her mother's sake, that lov'd him,
    Of which there is not one, I dare avow-
    For virtue and true beauty of the soul,
    The last is for my men-they are the poorest,
    That they may have their wages duly paid 'em,
    These are the whole contents; and, good my lord,
    By that you love the dearest in this world,
    Stand these poor people's friend, and urge the King
    Or let me lose the fashion of a man!
    With maiden flowers, that all the world may know
London. A gallery in the palace
    To waste these times. Good hour of night, Sir Thomas!
    Whither so late?
  LOVELL. Came you from the King, my lord?
    With the Duke of Suffolk.
  GARDINER. Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell. What's the matter?
    It seems you are in haste. An if there be
    As they say spirits do-at midnight, have
    In them a wilder nature than the business
    She'll with the labour end.
    Good time, and live; but for the stock, Sir Thomas,
    Cry thee amen; and yet my conscience says
    Sleep in their graves.
    Beside that of the Jewel House, is made Master
    O' th' Rolls, and the King's secretary; further, sir,
    Stands in the gap and trade of moe preferments,
    With which the time will load him. Th' Archbishop
    Is the King's hand and tongue, and who dare speak
    Incens'd the lords o' th' Council, that he is-
    For so I know he is, they know he is-
    That does infect the land; with which they moved
    Have broken with the King, who hath so far
    To-morrow morning to the Council board
         Enter the KING and the DUKE OF SUFFOLK
    Now, Lovell, from the Queen what is the news?
    In the great'st humbleness, and desir'd your Highness
    With gentle travail, to the gladding of
    Prithee to bed; and in thy pray'rs remember
  DENNY. Sir, I have brought my lord the Archbishop,
  LOVELL.  [Aside]  This is about that which the bishop spake.
    I am happily come hither.
  KING. Avoid the gallery.                     [LOVELL seems to stay]
    Come, you and I must walk a turn together;
    But that, till further trial in those charges
    To make your house our Tow'r. You a brother of us,
    Prithee let's walk. Now, by my holidame,
    I should have ta'en some pains to bring together
    Without indurance further.
    If they shall fail, I with mine enemies
    How your state stands i' th' world, with the whole world?
    Your enemies are many, and not small; their practices
    Must bear the same proportion; and not ever
    The justice and the truth o' th' question carries
    You do appear before them; if they shall chance,
    The best persuasions to the contrary
    Deliver them, and your appeal to us
    There make before them. Look, the good man weeps!
    He's honest, on mine honour. God's blest Mother!
  OLD LADY. I'll not come back; the tidings that I bring
    Under their blessed wings!
    I guess thy message. Is the Queen deliver'd?
  KING. Give her an hundred marks. I'll to the Queen.            Exit
    Said I for this the girl was like to him! I'll
    I'll put it to the issue.                                  Exeunt
Lobby before the Council Chamber
  CRANMER. I hope I am not too late; and yet the gentleman
    That was sent to me from the Council pray'd me
    Who waits there? Sure you know me?
    I came this way so happily; the King
    God turn their hearts! I never sought their malice-
    To quench mine honour; they would shame to make me
    'Mong boys, grooms, and lackeys. But their pleasures
         Enter the KING and BUTTS at window above
  BUTTS. I'll show your Grace the strangest sight-
    Is this the honour they do one another?
    'Tis well there's one above 'em yet. I had thought
    To dance attendance on their lordships' pleasures,
    And at the door too, like a post with packets.
    By holy Mary, Butts, there's knavery!
    Let 'em alone, and draw the curtain close;
under the state. Enter LORD CHANCELLOR, places himself at the upper end
of the table on the left band, a seat being left void above him,
LORD CHAMBERLAIN, GARDINER, seat themselves in order on each side;
CROMWELL at lower end, as secretary. KEEPER at the door
  CHANCELLOR. Speak to the business, master secretary;
  NORFOLK. Who waits there?
      CRANMER approaches the Council table
    Toward the King first, then his laws, in filling
    Pace 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle,
    But stop their mouth with stubborn bits and spur 'em
    Till they obey the manage. If we suffer,
    Farewell all physic; and what follows then?
    Of the whole state; as of late days our neighbours,
  CRANMER. My good lords, hitherto in all the progress
    And the strong course of my authority
    Might go one way, and safely; and the end
    Was ever to do well. Nor is there living-
    Pray heaven the King may never find a heart
    Dare bite the best. I do beseech your lordships
    Be what they will, may stand forth face to face
    From hence you be committed to the Tower;
    Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience,
    That's the plain truth. Your painted gloss discovers,
    For what they have been; 'tis a cruelty
    Men's prayers then would seek you, not their fears.
    There to remain till the King's further pleasure
  CRANMER. Is there no other way of mercy,
  GARDINER. What other
    Let some o' th' guard be ready there.
           Enter the guard
    Must I go like a traitor thither?
    I have a little yet to say. Look there, my lords;
    Out of the gripes of cruel men and give it
    To a most noble judge, the King my master.
  CHAMBERLAIN. This is the King's ring.
  SUFFOLK. 'Tis the right ring, by heav'n. I told ye all,
    The King will suffer but the little finger
    Against this man-whose honesty the devil
    Ye blew the fire that burns ye. Now have at ye!
      Enter the KING frowning on them; he takes his seat
    One that in all obedience makes the church
    The chief aim of his honour and, to strengthen
    To me you cannot reach you play the spaniel,
    [To CRANMER]  Good man, sit down. Now let me see the proudest
    He that dares most but wag his finger at thee.
    Than but once think this place becomes thee not.
    Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean;
    concerning his imprisonment was rather-
    If there be faith in men-meant for his trial
    And fair purgation to the world, than malice,
    You must be godfather, and answer for her.
    Two noble partners with you: the old Duchess of Norfolk
    And Lady Marquis Dorset. Will these please you?
    And brother-love I do it.
    Of thee, which says thus: 'Do my Lord of Canterbury
    take the court for Paris garden? Ye rude slaves, leave your
    and strong ones; these are but switches to 'em. I'll scratch
    Unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannons,
  PORTER. How got they in, and be hang'd?
  MAN. Alas, I know not: how gets the tide in?
    You see the poor remainder-could distribute,
    That had a head to hit, either young or old,
    Keep the door close, sirrah.
    strange Indian with the great tool come to court, the
    will beget a thousand: here will be father, godfather,
    and all together.
  MAN. The spoons will be the bigger, sir. There is a fellow
    somewhat near the door, he should be a brazier by his
    face, for, o' my conscience, twenty of the dog-days now
    reign in's nose; all that stand about him are under the line,
    they need no other penance. That fire-drake did I hit three
    times on the head, and three times was his nose discharged
    against me; he stands there like a mortar-piece, to blow us.
    for kindling such a combustion in the state. I miss'd the
    to her succour, which were the hope o' th' Strand, where
    At length they came to th' broomstaff to me; I defied 'em
    mine honour in and let 'em win the work: the devil was
  PORTER. These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse
    and fight for bitten apples; that no audience but the tribulation
    of Tower-hill or the limbs of Limehouse, their dear
    brothers, are able to endure. I have some of 'em in Limbo
    Patrum, and there they are like to dance these three days;
    besides the running banquet of two beadles that is to come.
          Enter the LORD CHAMBERLAIN
    They grow still too; from all parts they are coming,
    As if we kept a fair here! Where are these porters,
    There's a trim rabble let in: are all these
    Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies,
    When they pass back from the christening.
    If the King blame me for't, I'll lay ye an
    Ye should do service. Hark! the trumpets sound;
    Th' are come already from the christening.
    Go break among the press and find a way out
    To let the troops pass fairly, or I'll find
    A Marshalsea shall hold ye play these two months.
  PORTER. Make way there for the Princess.
    I'll peck you o'er the pales else.                         Exeunt
Enter TRUMPETS, sounding; then two ALDERMEN, LORD MAYOR, GARTER, CRANMER,
two Noblemen bearing great standing-bowls for the christening gifts;
then four Noblemen bearing a canopy, under which the DUCHESS OF NORFOLK,
godmother, bearing the CHILD richly habited in a mantle, etc.,
train borne by a LADY; then follows the MARCHIONESS DORSET,
the other godmother, and LADIES. The troop pass once about the stage,
    life, long and ever-happy, to the high and mighty
  CRANMER.  [Kneeling]  And to your royal Grace and the
  KING. Stand up, lord.                   [The KING kisses the child]
    With this kiss take my blessing: God protect thee!
    For heaven now bids me; and the words I utter
    Let none think flattery, for they'll find 'em truth.
    With all the virtues that attend the good,
    And hang their heads with sorrow. Good grows with her;
    From her shall read the perfect ways of honour,
    And by those claim their greatness, not by blood.
    The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix
    Her ashes new create another heir
    Who from the sacred ashes of her honour
    That were the servants to this chosen infant,
    Shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him;
    Wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine,
    His honour and the greatness of his name
    To all the plains about him; our children's children
  CRANMER. She shall be, to the happiness of England,
    She must, the saints must have her-yet a virgin;
    To th' ground, and all the world shall mourn her.
    And ye shall find me thankful. Lead the way, lords;
    Ye must all see the Queen, and she must thank ye,
    All that are here. Some come to take their ease
    They'll say 'tis nought; others to hear the city
    Which we have not done neither; that, I fear,
    All the expected good w'are like to hear
    For such a one we show'd 'em. If they smile
    All the best men are ours; for 'tis ill hap
    If they hold when their ladies bid 'em clap.
      Britaine, the elder brother of King John
    PHILIP THE BASTARD, his half-brother
    LEWIS, the Dauphin
    CARDINAL PANDULPH, the Pope's legate
    QUEEN ELINOR, widow of King Henry II and mother to
    CONSTANCE, Mother to Arthur
    BLANCH OF SPAIN, daughter to the King of Castile
Enter KING JOHN, QUEEN ELINOR, PEMBROKE, ESSEX, SALISBURY, and others,
  CHATILLON. Thus, after greeting, speaks the King of France
    In my behaviour to the majesty,
  KING JOHN. Silence, good mother; hear the embassy.
    Of thy deceased brother Geffrey's son,
    To this fair island and the territories,
    Desiring thee to lay aside the sword
    Which sways usurpingly these several titles,
    And put the same into young Arthur's hand,
    To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld.
    The farthest limit of my embassy.
    Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France;
    For ere thou canst report I will be there,
    So hence! Be thou the trumpet of our wrath
    Till she had kindled France and all the world
    Upon the right and party of her son?
    Which now the manage of two kingdoms must
  ESSEX. My liege, here is the strangest controversy
    Come from the country to be judg'd by you
    That e'er I heard. Shall I produce the men?
  KING JOHN. Let them approach.                          Exit SHERIFF
                     brother
    A soldier by the honour-giving hand
    Of Coeur-de-lion knighted in the field.
  KING JOHN. Is that the elder, and art thou the heir?
    You came not of one mother then, it seems.
  BASTARD. Most certain of one mother, mighty king-
    That is well known- and, as I think, one father;
    But for the certain knowledge of that truth
    I put you o'er to heaven and to my mother.
  ELINOR. Out on thee, rude man! Thou dost shame thy mother,
    That is my brother's plea, and none of mine;
    Heaven guard my mother's honour and my land!
  BASTARD. I know not why, except to get the land.
    That still I lay upon my mother's head;
    Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me!-
    And were our father, and this son like him-
    O old Sir Robert, father, on my knee
    I give heaven thanks I was not like to thee!
    In the large composition of this man?
    And finds them perfect Richard. Sirrah, speak,
    What doth move you to claim your brother's land?
  BASTARD. Because he hath a half-face, like my father.
  ROBERT. My gracious liege, when that my father liv'd,
    Your brother did employ my father much-
    Your tale must be how he employ'd my mother.
    To Germany, there with the Emperor
    Th' advantage of his absence took the King,
    And in the meantime sojourn'd at my father's;
    Between my father and my mother lay,
    As I have heard my father speak himself,
    That this my mother's son was none of his;
    And if he were, he came into the world
    Full fourteen weeks before the course of time.
    My father's land, as was my father's will.
  KING JOHN. Sirrah, your brother is legitimate:
    Your father's wife did after wedlock bear him,
    And if she did play false, the fault was hers;
    Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands
    That marry wives. Tell me, how if my brother,
    Had of your father claim'd this son for his?
    In sooth, good friend, your father might have kept
    This calf, bred from his cow, from all the world;
    In sooth, he might; then, if he were my brother's,
    My brother might not claim him; nor your father,
    My mother's son did get your father's heir;
    Your father's heir must have your father's land.
  ROBERT. Shall then my father's will be of no force
  ELINOR. Whether hadst thou rather be a Faulconbridge,
    And like thy brother, to enjoy thy land,
    Or the reputed son of Coeur-de-lion,
  BASTARD. Madam, an if my brother had my shape
  ELINOR. I like thee well. Wilt thou forsake thy fortune,
  BASTARD. Brother, take you my land, I'll take my chance.
    Madam, I'll follow you unto the death.
  ELINOR. Nay, I would have you go before me thither.
  BASTARD. Brother by th' mother's side, give me your hand;
    My father gave me honour, yours gave land.
    Now blessed be the hour, by night or day,
    Something about, a little from the right,
    In at the window, or else o'er the hatch;
    A landless knight makes thee a landed squire.
  BASTARD. Brother, adieu. Good fortune come to thee!
                                           Exeunt all but the BASTARD
    But many a many foot of land the worse.
    Why then I suck my teeth and catechize
    And then comes answer like an Absey book:
    And talking of the Alps and Apennines,
    The Pyrenean and the river Po-
    And fits the mounting spirit like myself;
    For he is but a bastard to the time
    And so am I, whether I smack or no;
    But from the inward motion to deliver
    Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age's tooth;
    For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising.
    O me, 'tis my mother! How now, good lady!
  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE. Where is that slave, thy brother?
  BASTARD. My brother Robert, old Sir Robert's son?
    Colbrand the giant, that same mighty man?
    There's toys abroad-anon I'll tell thee more.
    We know his handiwork. Therefore, good mother,
    To whom am I beholding for these limbs?
  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE. Hast thou conspired with thy brother too,
  BASTARD. Knight, knight, good mother, Basilisco-like.
    But, mother, I am not Sir Robert's son:
    Then, good my mother, let me know my father-
    Some proper man, I hope. Who was it, mother?
  BASTARD. As faithfully as I deny the devil.
  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE. King Richard Coeur-de-lion was thy father.
    Thou art the issue of my dear offence,
    Madam, I would not wish a better father.
    Some sins do bear their privilege on earth,
    The aweless lion could not wage the fight
    He that perforce robs lions of their hearts
    May easily win a woman's. Ay, my mother,
    With all my heart I thank thee for my father!
    Come, lady, I will show thee to my kin;
    And they shall say when Richard me begot,
Enter, on one side, AUSTRIA and forces; on the other, KING PHILIP OF FRANCE,
LEWIS the Dauphin, CONSTANCE, ARTHUR, and forces
    Richard, that robb'd the lion of his heart
    And fought the holy wars in Palestine,
    At our importance hither is he come
    And to rebuke the usurpation
    Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.
    The rather that you give his offspring life,
    Shadowing their right under your wings of war.
    Welcome before the gates of Angiers, Duke.
  KING PHILIP. A noble boy! Who would not do thee right?
    Till Angiers and the right thou hast in France,
    Together with that pale, that white-fac'd shore,
    Whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides
    And coops from other lands her islanders-
    Even till that England, hedg'd in with the main,
    Even till that utmost corner of the west
    Salute thee for her king. Till then, fair boy,
  CONSTANCE. O, take his mother's thanks, a widow's thanks,
  AUSTRIA. The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords
  KING PHILIP. Well then, to work! Our cannon shall be bent
    Against the brows of this resisting town;
    To cull the plots of best advantages.
    Wade to the market-place in Frenchmen's blood,
    And then we shall repent each drop of blood
    We coldly pause for thee. Chatillon, speak.
    And stir them up against a mightier task.
    With him along is come the mother-queen,
    With her the Lady Blanch of Spain;
    With them a bastard of the king's deceas'd;
    And all th' unsettled humours of the land-
    Have sold their fortunes at their native homes,
    Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs,
    Than now the English bottoms have waft o'er
    Did never float upon the swelling tide
    To do offence and scathe in Christendom.             [Drum beats]
    The interruption of their churlish drums
    Cuts off more circumstance: they are at hand;
    To parley or to fight, therefore prepare.
    Let them be welcome then; we are prepar'd.
       Enter KING JOHN, ELINOR, BLANCH, the BASTARD,
                 PEMBROKE, and others
    From France to England, there to live in peace!
    Cut off the sequence of posterity,
    Upon the maiden virtue of the crown.
    Look here upon thy brother Geffrey's face:
    These eyes, these brows, were moulded out of his;
    Which died in Geffrey, and the hand of time
    That Geffrey was thy elder brother born,
    And this is Geffrey's. In the name of God,
    How comes it then that thou art call'd a king,
    When living blood doth in these temples beat
    Which owe the crown that thou o'er-masterest?
    To look into the blots and stains of right.
    That thou mayst be a queen and check the world!
    Liker in feature to his father Geffrey
    His father never was so true begot;
    It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother.
  ELINOR. There's a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.
  CONSTANCE. There's a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.
  BASTARD. Hear the crier.
  AUSTRIA. What the devil art thou?
  BASTARD. One that will play the devil, sir, with you,
    You are the hare of whom the proverb goes,
    Whose valour plucks dead lions by the beard;
    That did disrobe the lion of that robe!
  BASTARD. It lies as sightly on the back of him
    King John, this is the very sum of all:
    In right of Arthur, do I claim of thee;
    Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms?
  KING JOHN. My life as soon. I do defy thee, France.
    Arthur of Britaine, yield thee to my hand,
    And out of my dear love I'll give thee more
    Than e'er the coward hand of France can win.
    Submit thee, boy.
  ARTHUR. Good my mother, peace!
  ELINOR. His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps.
    His grandam's wrongs, and not his mother's shames,
    Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be brib'd
    Infortunate in nothing but in thee.
    The canon of the law is laid on him,
    Being but the second generation
    But God hath made her sin and her the plague
    Her injury the beadle to her sin;
    All punish'd in the person of this child,
    A will that bars the title of thy son.
    To these ill-tuned repetitions.
    Some trumpet summon hither to the walls
    These men of Angiers; let us hear them speak
    Whose title they admit, Arthur's or John's.
      Trumpet sounds. Enter citizens upon the walls
  CITIZEN. Who is it that hath warn'd us to the walls?
  KING JOHN. For our advantage; therefore hear us first.
    Before the eye and prospect of your town,
    Have hither march'd to your endamagement;
    The cannons have their bowels full of wrath,
    And ready mounted are they to spit forth
    And merciless proceeding by these French
    By the compulsion of their ordinance
    By this time from their fixed beds of lime
    But on the sight of us your lawful king,
    Behold, the French amaz'd vouchsafe a parle;
    Is most divinely vow'd upon the right
    Son to the elder brother of this man,
    In warlike march these greens before your town,
    Being no further enemy to you
    Than the constraint of hospitable zeal
    In the relief of this oppressed child
    Religiously provokes. Be pleased then
    And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear,
    'Tis not the roundure of your old-fac'd walls
    Though all these English and their discipline
    Were harbour'd in their rude circumference.
    Or shall we give the signal to our rage,
  CITIZEN. In brief: we are the King of England's subjects;
  KING JOHN. Acknowledge then the King, and let me in.
  CITIZEN. That can we not; but he that proves the King,
    Have we ramm'd up our gates against the world.
  KING JOHN. Doth not the crown of England prove the King?
  KING JOHN. To verify our title with their lives.
    We for the worthiest hold the right from both.
  KING JOHN. Then God forgive the sin of all those souls
    That to their everlasting residence,
    Before the dew of evening fall shall fleet
  BASTARD. Saint George, that swing'd the dragon, and e'er since
  BASTARD. O, tremble, for you hear the lion roar!
  KING JOHN. Up higher to the plain, where we'll set forth
  BASTARD. Speed then to take advantage of the field.
  KING PHILIP. It shall be so; and at the other hill
    Command the rest to stand. God and our right!              Exeunt
    Here, after excursions, enter the HERALD OF FRANCE,
              with trumpets, to the gates
    Who by the hand of France this day hath made
    Much work for tears in many an English mother,
    Whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground;
    Coldly embracing the discoloured earth;
    Upon the dancing banners of the French,
    Hither return all gilt with Frenchmen's blood.
    That did display them when we first march'd forth;
    Dy'd in the dying slaughter of their foes.
    Open your gates and give the victors way.
    From first to last the onset and retire
    One must prove greatest. While they weigh so even,
    We hold our town for neither, yet for both.
    Enter the two KINGS, with their powers, at several doors
    Say, shall the current of our right run on?
    A peaceful progress to the ocean.
    Rather, lost more. And by this hand I swear,
    That sways the earth this climate overlooks,
    We'll put thee down, 'gainst whom these arms we bear,
    Or add a royal number to the dead,
    Gracing the scroll that tells of this war's loss
    With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.
    When the rich blood of kings is set on fire!
    And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men,
    Why stand these royal fronts amazed thus?
    Cry 'havoc!' kings; back to the stained field,
    The other's peace. Till then, blows, blood, and death!
  KING JOHN. Whose party do the townsmen yet admit?
  CITIZEN. The King of England, when we know the King.
  BASTARD. By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings,
    And stand securely on their battlements
    As in a theatre, whence they gape and point
    Do like the mutines of Jerusalem,
    Their battering cannon, charged to the mouths,
    Till their soul-fearing clamours have brawl'd down
    I'd play incessantly upon these jades,
    Leave them as naked as the vulgar air.
    To whom in favour she shall give the day,
    Smacks it not something of the policy?
  KING JOHN. Now, by the sky that hangs above our heads,
    And lay this Angiers even with the ground;
  BASTARD. An if thou hast the mettle of a king,
    Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,
    As we will ours, against these saucy walls;
    And when that we have dash'd them to the ground,
    Why then defy each other, and pell-mell
  KING JOHN. We from the west will send destruction
  AUSTRIA. I from the north.
  KING PHILIP. Our thunder from the south
    Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town.
    Austria and France shoot in each other's mouth.
    I'll stir them to it.-Come, away, away!
    That here come sacrifices for the field.
  CITIZEN. That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanch,
    Is niece to England; look upon the years
    Of Lewis the Dauphin and that lovely maid.
    Is the young Dauphin every way complete-
    He is the half part of a blessed man,
    O, two such silver currents, when they join,
    Do glorify the banks that bound them in;
    To these two princes, if you marry them.
    That shakes the rotten carcass of old Death
    He gives the bastinado with his tongue;
    Since I first call'd my brother's father dad.
    Thy now unsur'd assurance to the crown
    I see a yielding in the looks of France;
    Mark how they whisper. Urge them while their souls
    Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath
  CITIZEN. Why answer not the double majesties
  KING JOHN. If that the Dauphin there, thy princely son,
    And all that we upon this side the sea-
    Holds hand with any princess of the world.
  KING PHILIP. What say'st thou, boy? Look in the lady's face.
    Which, being but the shadow of your son,
    Drawn in the flattering table of her eye.
  BASTARD.  [Aside]  Drawn in the flattering table of her eye,
    Hang'd in the frowning wrinkle of her brow,
    That hang'd and drawn and quarter'd there should be
    Further I will not flatter you, my lord,
    Though churlish thoughts themselves should be your judge-
  KING JOHN. What say these young ones? What say you, my niece?
  KING JOHN. Speak then, Prince Dauphin; can you love this lady?
    Poictiers, and Anjou, these five provinces,
    With her to thee; and this addition more,
    Is not the Lady Constance in this troop?
    Brother of England, how may we content
    Which we, God knows, have turn'd another way,
    We make him lord of. Call the Lady Constance;
    If not fill up the measure of her will,
                                           Exeunt all but the BASTARD
    John, to stop Arthur's tide in the whole,
    Whom zeal and charity brought to the field
    As God's own soldier, rounded in the ear
    That broker that still breaks the pate of faith,
    But the word 'maid,' cheats the poor maid of that;
    Commodity, the bias of the world-
    Clapp'd on the outward eye of fickle France,
    Not that I have the power to clutch my hand
    Like a poor beggar raileth on the rich.
    And say there is no sin but to be rich;
    And being rich, my virtue then shall be
    To say there is no vice but beggary.
    Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee.                   Exit
    I trust I may not trust thee, for thy word
    Is but the vain breath of a common man:
    Believe me I do not believe thee, man;
    I have a king's oath to the contrary.
    Oppress'd with wrongs, and therefore full of fears;
    But they will quake and tremble all this day.
    Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words?
    But this one word, whether thy tale be true.
  SALISBURY. As true as I believe you think them false
    As doth the fury of two desperate men
    Which in the very meeting fall and die!
    Lewis marry Blanch! O boy, then where art thou?
    This news hath made thee a most ugly man.
  SALISBURY. What other harm have I, good lady, done
    But spoke the harm that is by others done?
    Ugly, and sland'rous to thy mother's womb,
    I would not care, I then would be content;
    For then I should not love thee; no, nor thou
    Nature and Fortune join'd to make thee great:
    And with the half-blown rose; but Fortune, O!
    She is corrupted, chang'd, and won from thee;
    And made his majesty the bawd to theirs.
    Envenom him with words, or get thee gone
    I may not go without you to the kings.
  CONSTANCE. Thou mayst, thou shalt; I will not go with thee;
    To me, and to the state of my great grief,
    That no supporter but the huge firm earth
    Can hold it up.                     [Seats herself on the ground]
       ELINOR, the BASTARD, AUSTRIA, and attendants
    To solemnize this day the glorious sun
    Stays in his course and plays the alchemist,
    Among the high tides in the calendar?
    Nay, rather turn this day out of the week,
    Pray that their burdens may not fall this day,
    Lest that their hopes prodigiously be cross'd;
    To curse the fair proceedings of this day.
    But now in arms you strengthen it with yours.
    Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjur'd kings!
    Let not the hours of this ungodly day
    Wear out the day in peace; but, ere sunset,
    Set armed discord 'twixt these perjur'd kings!
    Thou ever strong upon the stronger side!
    To teach thee safety! Thou art perjur'd too,
  KING PHILIP. Here comes the holy legate of the Pope.
    To thee, King John, my holy errand is.
    And from Pope Innocent the legate here,
    Why thou against the Church, our holy mother,
    This, in our foresaid holy father's name,
    Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.
    Can task the free breath of a sacred king?
    To charge me to an answer, as the Pope.
    Tell him this tale, and from the mouth of England
    Shall tithe or toll in our dominions;
    So tell the Pope, all reverence set apart
  KING PHILIP. Brother of England, you blaspheme in this.
  KING JOHN. Though you and all the kings of Christendom
    Dreading the curse that money may buy out,
    And by the merit of vile gold, dross, dust,
    Though you and all the rest, so grossly led,
    Against the Pope, and count his friends my foes.
  PANDULPH. Then by the lawful power that I have
    Good father Cardinal, cry thou 'amen'
    For he that holds his kingdom holds the law;
    How can the law forbid my tongue to curse?
    Let go the hand of that arch-heretic,
    And raise the power of France upon his head,
  AUSTRIA. King Philip, listen to the Cardinal.
  AUSTRIA. Well, ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs,
  BASTARD. Your breeches best may carry them.
  KING JOHN. Philip, what say'st thou to the Cardinal?
  CONSTANCE. What should he say, but as the Cardinal?
  LEWIS. Bethink you, father; for the difference
    Or the light loss of England for a friend.
    Forgo the easier.
  BLANCH. That's the curse of Rome.
  CONSTANCE. O Lewis, stand fast! The devil tempts thee here
    Which only lives but by the death of faith,
    O then, tread down my need, and faith mounts up:
  PANDULPH. What canst thou say but will perplex thee more,
  KING PHILIP. Good reverend father, make my person yours,
    And the conjunction of our inward souls
    Married in league, coupled and link'd together
    The latest breath that gave the sound of words
    Heaven knows, they were besmear'd and overstain'd
    And shall these hands, so lately purg'd of blood,
    Unswear faith sworn, and on the marriage-bed
    And make a riot on the gentle brow
    My reverend father, let it not be so!
    Some gentle order; and then we shall be blest
    Or let the church, our mother, breathe her curse-
    A mother's curse-on her revolting son.
    France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue,
    A chafed lion by the mortal paw,
    A fasting tiger safer by the tooth,
    That is, to be the champion of our Church.
    The truth is then most done not doing it;
    Yet indirection thereby grows direct,
    Within the scorched veins of one new-burn'd.
    By what thou swear'st against the thing thou swear'st,
    And mak'st an oath the surety for thy truth
    Against an oath; the truth thou art unsure
    Against these giddy loose suggestions;
    If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know
    The peril of our curses fight on thee
    So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off,
    But in despair die under the black weight.
  LEWIS. Father, to arms!
    Against the blood that thou hast married?
    Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee,
    Thou virtuous Dauphin, alter not the doom
    Be stronger with thee than the name of wife?
  CONSTANCE. That which upholdeth him that thee upholds,
  KING PHILIP. Thou shalt not need. England, I will fall from thee.
  BASTARD. Old Time the clock-setter, that bald sexton Time,
    Is it as he will? Well then, France shall rue.
    Which is the side that I must go withal?
    And in their rage, I having hold of both,
    Father, I may not wish the fortune thine;
    Assured loss before the match be play'd.
  BLANCH. There where my fortune lives, there my life dies.
  KING JOHN. Cousin, go draw our puissance together.
  KING PHILIP. Thy rage shall burn thee up, and thou shalt turn
Alarums, excursions. Enter the BASTARD with AUSTRIA'S head
    Some airy devil hovers in the sky
    And pours down mischief. Austria's head lie there,
    While Philip breathes.
    My mother is assailed in our tent,
the BASTARD, HUBERT, and LORDS
    Thy grandam loves thee, and thy uncle will
    As dear be to thee as thy father was.
  ARTHUR. O, this will make my mother die with grief!
  KING JOHN.  [To the BASTARD]  Cousin, away for England! haste
    And, ere our coming, see thou shake the bags
    Set at liberty; the fat ribs of peace
    Must by the hungry now be fed upon.
  ELINOR. Come hither, little kinsman; hark, a word.
  KING JOHN. Come hither, Hubert. O my gentle Hubert,
    We owe thee much! Within this wall of flesh
    There is a soul counts thee her creditor,
    To say what good respect I have of thee.
    Yet it shall come for me to do thee good.
    The sun is in the heaven, and the proud day,
    Attended with the pleasures of the world,
    To give me audience. If the midnight bell
    Sound on into the drowsy race of night;
    Which else runs tickling up and down the veins,
    And strain their cheeks to idle merriment,
    But, ah, I will not! Yet I love thee well;
    On yon young boy. I'll tell thee what, my friend,
    I could be merry now. Hubert, I love thee.
    Well, I'll not say what I intend for thee.
  ELINOR. My blessing go with thee!
  KING PHILIP. So by a roaring tempest on the flood
    In the vile prison of afflicted breath.
    I prithee, lady, go away with me.
  CONSTANCE. Lo now! now see the issue of your peace!
    Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,
    And ring these fingers with thy household worms,
    And buss thee as thy wife. Misery's love,
    O that my tongue were in the thunder's mouth!
    Then with a passion would I shake the world,
    For then 'tis like I should forget myself.
    How I may be deliver'd of these woes,
    In the fair multitude of those her hairs!
    Do glue themselves in sociable grief,
    Sticking together in calamity.
    I tore them from their bonds, and cried aloud
    'O that these hands could so redeem my son,
    As they have given these hairs their liberty!'
    But now I envy at their liberty,
    And will again commit them to their bonds,
    And, father Cardinal, I have heard you say
    For since the birth of Cain, the first male child,
    And chase the native beauty from his cheek,
    When I shall meet him in the court of heaven
  CONSTANCE. Grief fills the room up of my absent child,
    When there is such disorder in my wit.
    My life, my joy, my food, my ail the world!
    Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;
    And bitter shame hath spoil'd the sweet world's taste,
  PANDULPH. Before the curing of a strong disease,
    Even in the instant of repair and health,
    On their departure most of all show evil;
    She looks upon them with a threat'ning eye.
    For even the breath of what I mean to speak
    Out of the path which shall directly lead
    Thy foot to England's throne. And therefore mark:
    That John may stand then, Arthur needs must fall;
  PANDULPH. You, in the right of Lady Blanch your wife,
    May then make all the claim that Arthur did.
    John lays you plots; the times conspire with you;
    This act, so evilly borne, shall cool the hearts
    Of all his people and freeze up their zeal,
    To check his reign but they will cherish it;
    No natural exhalation in the sky,
    But they will pluck away his natural cause
    And call them meteors, prodigies, and signs,
    Even at that news he dies; and then the hearts
    And kiss the lips of unacquainted change,
    Out of the bloody fingers' ends of john.
    Is now in England ransacking the Church,
    Were there in arms, they would be as a can
    To train ten thousand English to their side;
    Go with me to the King. 'Tis wonderful
    What may be wrought out of their discontent,
    Now that their souls are topful of offence.
    For England go; I will whet on the King.
    If you say ay, the King will not say no.                   Exeunt
  HUBERT. Heat me these irons hot; and look thou stand
    Within the arras. When I strike my foot
    Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth
    And bind the boy which you shall find with me
    Fast to the chair. Be heedful; hence, and watch.
  EXECUTIONER. I hope your warrant will bear out the deed.
    I should be as merry as the day is long;
  ARTHUR. Have you the heart? When your head did but ache,
    And, like the watchful minutes to the hour,
    Still and anon cheer'd up the heavy time,
    Why, then you must. Will you put out mine eyes,
    And with hot irons must I burn them out.
    Approaching near these eyes would drink my tears,
    Even in the matter of mine innocence;
    Even with the fierce looks of these bloody men.
  HUBERT. Give me the iron, I say, and bind him here.
    Nay, hear me, Hubert! Drive these men away,
    Nor look upon the iron angrily;
    Thrust but these men away, and I'll forgive you,
  ARTHUR. Alas, I then have chid away my friend!
  ARTHUR. Is there no remedy?
  ARTHUR. O heaven, that there were but a mote in yours,
    Then, feeling what small things are boisterous there,
  ARTHUR. Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues
    Lo, by my troth, the instrument is cold
  ARTHUR. No, in good sooth; the fire is dead with grief,
    Deny their office; only you do lack
    For all the treasure that thine uncle owes.
    With this same very iron to burn them out.
    I'll fill these dogged spies with false reports;
    That Hubert, for the wealth of all the world,
    Will not offend thee.
    Much danger do I undergo for thee.                         Exeunt
Enter KING JOHN, PEMBROKE, SALISBURY, and other LORDS
    Fresh expectation troubled not the land
    To gild refined gold, to paint the lily,
    To throw a perfume on the violet,
    To smooth the ice, or add another hue
    Unto the rainbow, or with taper-light
    To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish,
    And, in the last repeating, troublesome,
  SALISBURY. In this the antique and well-noted face
    It makes the course of thoughts to fetch about,
    They do confound their skill in covetousness;
    Doth make the fault the worse by th' excuse,
    Discredit more in hiding of the fault
    Than did the fault before it was so patch'd.
    I have possess'd you with, and think them strong;
  PEMBROKE. Then I, as one that am the tongue of these,
    To sound the purposes of all their hearts,
    Both for myself and them- but, chief of all,
    Your safety, for the which myself and them
    Bend their best studies, heartily request
    Doth move the murmuring lips of discontent
    Why then your fears-which, as they say, attend
    That the time's enemies may not have this
    Which for our goods we do no further ask
  PEMBROKE. This is the man should do the bloody deed:
    Doth show the mood of a much troubled breast,
  SALISBURY. The colour of the King doth come and go
  PEMBROKE. And when it breaks, I fear will issue thence
    Before the child himself felt he was sick.
    This must be answer'd either here or hence.
    Think you I bear the shears of destiny?
    Have I commandment on the pulse of life?
  PEMBROKE. Stay yet, Lord Salisbury, I'll go with thee
    That blood which ow'd the breadth of all this isle
    Three foot of it doth hold-bad world the while!
    No certain life achiev'd by others' death.
    Pour down thy weather-how goes all in France?
    Was levied in the body of a land.
    The copy of your speed is learn'd by them,
    For when you should be told they do prepare,
    The tidings comes that they are all arriv'd.
    Where hath it slept? Where is my mother's care,
    Is stopp'd with dust: the first of April died
    Your noble mother; and as I hear, my lord,
    My discontented peers! What! mother dead!
    How wildly then walks my estate in France!
  MESSENGER. Under the Dauphin.
    With these in tidings.
         Enter the BASTARD and PETER OF POMFRET
    Now! What says the world
  BASTARD. But if you be afear'd to hear the worst,
    Then let the worst, unheard, fall on your head.
    Under the tide; but now I breathe again
    Aloft the flood, and can give audience
  BASTARD. How I have sped among the clergymen
    But as I travell'd hither through the land,
    I find the people strangely fantasied;
    Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear;
    From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found
    That, ere the next Ascension-day at noon,
  PETER. Foreknowing that the truth will fall out so.
    For I must use thee.
    Hear'st thou the news abroad, who are arriv'd?
    And others more, going to seek the grave
    Of Arthur, whom they say is kill'd to-night
    And thrust thyself into their companies.
    I have a way to will their loves again;
    Bring them before me.
  BASTARD. I Will seek them out.
  KING JOHN. Nay, but make haste; the better foot before.
    Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels,
    And fly like thought from them to me again.
  BASTARD. The spirit of the time shall teach me speed.
    Some messenger betwixt me and the peers;
  KING JOHN. My mother dead!
  HUBERT. My lord, they say five moons were seen to-night;
    Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about
    The other four in wondrous motion.
  HUBERT. Old men and beldams in the streets
    Young Arthur's death is common in their mouths;
    And when they talk of him, they shake their heads,
    And whisper one another in the ear;
    And he that speaks doth gripe the hearer's wrist,
    The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool,
    Another lean unwash'd artificer
  KING JOHN. Why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears?
  KING JOHN. It is the curse of kings to be attended
    By slaves that take their humours for a warrant
    To break within the bloody house of life,
    And on the winking of authority
    To understand a law; to know the meaning
  KING JOHN. O, when the last account 'twixt heaven and earth
    Is to be made, then shall this hand and seal
    How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds
    A fellow by the hand of nature mark'd,
    Finding thee fit for bloody villainy,
    I faintly broke with thee of Arthur's death;
    Nay, in the body of the fleshly land,
  HUBERT. Arm you against your other enemies,
    Not painted with the crimson spots of blood.
    Is yet the cover of a fairer mind
  KING JOHN. Doth Arthur live? O, haste thee to the peers,
    Throw this report on their incensed rage
    And make them tame to their obedience!
    Forgive the comment that my passion made
    Presented thee more hideous than thou art.
    I conjure thee but slowly; run more fast.                  Exeunt
England. Before the castle
Enter ARTHUR, on the walls
    There's few or none do know me; if they did,
    O me! my uncle's spirit is in these stones.
    This gentle offer of the perilous time.
  PEMBROKE. Who brought that letter from the Cardinal?
    Whose private with me of the Dauphin's love
    Is much more general than these lines import.
  BIGOT. To-morrow morning let us meet him then.
  SALISBURY. Or rather then set forward; for 'twill be
                 Enter the BASTARD
    With our pure honours, nor attend the foot
    That leaves the print of blood where'er it walks.
    Return and tell him so. We know the worst.
  BASTARD. But there is little reason in your grief;
  SALISBURY. This is the prison. What is he lies here?
    Form such another? This is the very top,
    The height, the crest, or crest unto the crest,
    Of murder's arms; this is the bloodiest shame,
    The wildest savagery, the vilest stroke,
    Presented to the tears of soft remorse.
    To the yet unbegotten sin of times,
    If that it be the work of any hand.
  SALISBURY. If that it be the work of any hand!
    It is the shameful work of Hubert's hand;
    The practice and the purpose of the King;
    Never to taste the pleasures of the world,
    By giving it the worship of revenge.
    Arthur doth live; the King hath sent for you.
    Avaunt, thou hateful villain, get thee gone!
  SALISBURY. Must I rob the law?                  [Drawing his sword]
  SALISBURY. Not till I sheathe it in a murderer's skin.
    Nor tempt the danger of my true defence;
  BASTARD. Keep the peace, I say.
  BASTARD. Thou wert better gall the devil, Salisbury.
    I'll strike thee dead. Put up thy sword betime;
    That you shall think the devil is come from hell.
  BIGOT. Away toward Bury, to the Dauphin there!
  PEMBROKE. There tell the King he may inquire us out.
    Beyond the infinite and boundless reach
  BASTARD. Ha! I'll tell thee what:
    And if thou want'st a cord, the smallest thread
    Will serve to strangle thee; a rush will be a beam
    To hang thee on; or wouldst thou drown thyself,
    And it shall be as all the ocean,
    I do suspect thee very grievously.
    Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath
    Among the thorns and dangers of this world.
    The life, the right, and truth of all this realm
    Now for the bare-pick'd bone of majesty
    And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace;
    And follow me with speed. I'll to the King;
    And heaven itself doth frown upon the land.                Exeunt
  PANDULPH.  [Gives back the crown]  Take again
    From this my hand, as holding of the Pope,
  KING JOHN. Now keep your holy word; go meet the French;
    To stop their marches fore we are inflam'd.
    Swearing allegiance and the love of soul
    Then pause not; for the present time's so sick
    Upon your stubborn usage of the Pope;
    And make fair weather in your blust'ring land.
    Upon your oath of service to the Pope,
    Go I to make the French lay down their arms.                 Exit
  KING JOHN. Is this Ascension-day? Did not the prophet
                 Enter the BASTARD
  BASTARD. All Kent hath yielded; nothing there holds out
    Like a kind host, the Dauphin and his powers.
    After they heard young Arthur was alive?
    BASTARD. They found him dead, and cast into the streets,
    An empty casket, where the jewel of life
    Let not the world see fear and sad distrust
    Govern the motion of a kingly eye.
    Be stirring as the time; be fire with fire;
    Threaten the threat'ner, and outface the brow
    That borrow their behaviours from the great,
    Away, and glister like the god of war
    When he intendeth to become the field;
    What, shall they seek the lion in his den,
    And fright him there, and make him tremble there?
    To meet displeasure farther from the doors
  KING JOHN. The legate of the Pope hath been with me,
    And he hath promis'd to dismiss the powers
    Led by the Dauphin.
    Shall we, upon the footing of our land,
    Mocking the air with colours idly spread,
    Perchance the Cardinal cannot make your peace;
  KING JOHN. Have thou the ordering of this present time.
  BASTARD. Away, then, with good courage!
    Return the precedent to these lords again,
    Both they and we, perusing o'er these notes,
    May know wherefore we took the sacrament,
    And heal the inveterate canker of one wound
    To be a widow-maker! O, and there
    Cries out upon the name of Salisbury!
    But such is the infection of the time
    That, for the health and physic of our right,
    We cannot deal but with the very hand
    That we, the sons and children of this isle,
    Upon the spot of this enforced cause-
    To grace the gentry of a land remote
    That Neptune's arms, who clippeth thee about,
    Would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself
    And grapple thee unto a pagan shore,
    Where these two Christian armies might combine
    This show'r, blown up by tempest of the soul,
    Than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven
    Commend these waters to those baby eyes
    That never saw the giant world enrag'd,
    Nor met with fortune other than at feasts,
    Into the purse of rich prosperity
    That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.
    And even there, methinks, an angel spake:
    Look where the holy legate comes apace,
    To give us warrant from the hand of heaven
    And on our actions set the name of right
    That so stood out against the holy Church,
    And tame the savage spirit of wild war,
    It may lie gently at the foot of peace
    And be no further harmful than in show.
    To any sovereign state throughout the world.
    Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars
    You taught me how to know the face of right,
    I, by the honour of my marriage-bed,
    Have I not heard these islanders shout out
    'Vive le roi!' as I have bank'd their towns?
    Have I not here the best cards for the game
    And shall I now give o'er the yielded set?
  PANDULPH. You look but on the outside of this work.
    And cull'd these fiery spirits from the world
    Even in the jaws of danger and of death.
             Enter the BASTARD, attended
  BASTARD. According to the fair play of the world,
    My holy lord of Milan, from the King
    And, as you answer, I do know the scope
  BASTARD. By all the blood that ever fury breath'd,
    To whip this dwarfish war, these pigmy arms,
    From out the circle of his territories.
    That hand which had the strength, even at your door.
    To cudgel you and make you take the hatch,
    Even at the crying of your nation's crow,
    No. Know the gallant monarch is in arms
    You bloody Neroes, ripping up the womb
    Of your dear mother England, blush for shame;
    Their needles to lances, and their gentle hearts
    We grant thou canst outscold us. Fare thee well;
  LEWIS. We will attend to neither.
    Strike up the drums; and let the tongue of war,
    And echo with the clamour of thy drum,
    Sound but another, and another shall,
    As loud as thine, rattle the welkin's ear
    And mock the deep-mouth'd thunder; for at hand-
    Whom he hath us'd rather for sport than need-
    To feast upon whole thousands of the French.
  KING JOHN. How goes the day with us? O, tell me, Hubert.
    Desires your Majesty to leave the field
  KING JOHN. Tell him, toward Swinstead, to the abbey there.
  MESSENGER. Be of good comfort; for the great supply
    That was expected by the Dauphin here
    The French fight coldly, and retire themselves.
England. Another part of the battlefield
  SALISBURY. I did not think the King so stor'd with friends.
  PEMBROKE. Up once again; put spirit in the French;
    If they miscarry, we miscarry too.
    In spite of spite, alone upholds the day.
  PEMBROKE. They say King John, sore sick, hath left the field.
  MELUN. Lead me to the revolts of England here.
  SALISBURY. When we were happy we had other names.
  PEMBROKE. It is the Count Melun.
    Unthread the rude eye of rebellion,
    For if the French be lords of this loud day,
    He means to recompense the pains you take
    Upon the altar at Saint Edmundsbury;
    Resolveth from his figure 'gainst the fire?
    What in the world should make me now deceive,
    Since I must lose the use of all deceit?
    Why should I then be false, since it is true
    I say again, if Lewis do will the day,
    Behold another day break in the east;
    Already smokes about the burning crest
    Of the old, feeble, and day-wearied sun,
    Paying the fine of rated treachery
    If Lewis by your assistance win the day.
    From forth the noise and rumour of the field,
    Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts
  SALISBURY. We do believe thee; and beshrew my soul
    But I do love the favour and the form
    Of this most fair occasion, by the which
    We will untread the steps of damned flight,
    My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence;
    For I do see the cruel pangs of death
    But stay'd and made the western welkin blush,
    When English measure backward their own ground
    Last in the field and almost lords of it!
  MESSENGER. Where is my prince, the Dauphin?
  MESSENGER. The Count Melun is slain; the English lords
    To try the fair adventure of to-morrow.                    Exeunt
Enter the BASTARD and HUBERT, severally
  HUBERT. Who's there? Speak, ho! speak quickly, or I shoot.
  HUBERT. Of the part of England.
  BASTARD. Whither dost thou go?
  HUBERT. What's that to thee? Why may I not demand
    I come one way of the Plantagenets.
    Should scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.
  HUBERT. Why, here walk I in the black brow of night
  BASTARD. Brief, then; and what's the news?
  HUBERT. O, my sweet sir, news fitting to the night,
  BASTARD. Show me the very wound of this ill news;
    The better arm you to the sudden time
    And brought Prince Henry in their company;
    At whose request the King hath pardon'd them,
    And they are all about his Majesty.
    I'll tell thee, Hubert, half my power this night,
    Passing these flats, are taken by the tide-
    These Lincoln Washes have devoured them;
    Away, before! conduct me to the King;
  PRINCE HENRY. It is too late; the life of all his blood
    Which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling-house,
    Doth by the idle comments that it makes
    Foretell the ending of mortality.
    That, being brought into the open air,
    It would allay the burning quality
  PRINCE HENRY. Let him be brought into the orchard here.
    In their continuance will not feel themselves.
    Death, having prey'd upon the outward parts,
    Leaves them invisible, and his siege is now
    Against the mind, the which he pricks and wounds
    Which, in their throng and press to that last hold,
    Confound themselves. 'Tis strange that death should sing.
    I am the cygnet to this pale faint swan
    And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings
    His soul and body to their lasting rest.
    And none of you will bid the winter come
    Nor let my kingdom's rivers take their course
    Through my burn'd bosom, nor entreat the north
  PRINCE HENRY. O that there were some virtue in my tears,
  KING JOHN. The salt in them is hot.
    Within me is a hell; and there the poison
                 Enter the BASTARD
    And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail
    And then all this thou seest is but a clod
  BASTARD. The Dauphin is preparing hitherward,
    For in a night the best part of my pow'r,
    Were in the Washes all unwarily
    Devoured by the unexpected flood.                 [The KING dies]
  SALISBURY. You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear.
    What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,
    To do the office for thee of revenge,
    And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven,
    Out of the weak door of our fainting land.
  SALISBURY. It seems you know not, then, so much as we:
    Who half an hour since came from the Dauphin,
  BASTARD. He will the rather do it when he sees
    To the sea-side, and put his cause and quarrel
    To the disposing of the Cardinal;
    With whom yourself, myself, and other lords,
    With other princes that may best be spar'd,
    Shall wait upon your father's funeral.
  BASTARD. Thither shall it, then;
    The lineal state and glory of the land!
  SALISBURY. And the like tender of our love we make,
  BASTARD. O, let us pay the time but needful woe,
    Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror,
    Now these her princes are come home again,
    Come the three corners of the world in arms,
    And we shall shock them. Nought shall make us rue,
  LEPIDUS, third member of the Triumvirate
  MARCUS BRUTUS, leader of the conspiracy against Caesar
  CASSIUS, instigator of the conspiracy
SCENE: Rome, the conspirators' camp near Sardis,  and the plains of Philippi.
    Upon a laboring day without the sign
  MARULLUS. Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
  SECOND COMMONER. Truly, Sir, all that I live by is with the awl; I
    awl. I am indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes; when they are in
    great danger, I recover them. As proper men as ever trod upon
    neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork.
    Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
  SECOND COMMONER. Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes to get myself
    Your infants in your arms, and there have sat
    To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome.
    To hear the replication of your sounds
    Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
    Assemble all the poor men of your sort,
    Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears
    Into the channel, till the lowest stream
    Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.
    See whether their basest metal be not moved;
    They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.
    Go you down that way towards the Capitol;
    This way will I. Disrobe the images
    If you do find them deck'd with ceremonies.
    You know it is the feast of Lupercal.
    And drive away the vulgar from the streets;
    So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
    These growing feathers pluck'd from Caesar's wing
    Who else would soar above the view of men
Flourish. Enter Caesar; Antony, for the course; Calpurnia, Portia,
among them a Soothsayer.
    Shake off their sterile curse.
  CAESAR. Who is it in the press that calls on me?
    I hear a tongue, shriller than all the music,
  SOOTHSAYER. Beware the ides of March.
  BRUTUS. A soothsayer you beware the ides of March.
  CASSIUS. Fellow, come from the throng; look upon Caesar.
  SOOTHSAYER. Beware the ides of March.
  CASSIUS. Will you go see the order of the course?
    I turn the trouble of my countenance
    But let not therefore my good friends be grieved-
    Nor construe any further my neglect
    Forgets the shows of love to other men.
  BRUTUS. No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itself
    But by reflection, by some other things.
    Where many of the best respect in Rome,
    That I do fawn on men and hug them hard
    And after scandal them, or if you know
    To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.
  BRUTUS. What means this shouting? I do fear the people
    Choose Caesar for their king.
    If it be aught toward the general good,
    Set honor in one eye and death i' the other
    For let the gods so speed me as I love
    Well, honor is the subject of my story.
    I cannot tell what you and other men
    Endure the winter's cold as well as he.
    And swim to yonder point?" Upon the word,
    But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
    Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
    The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber
    Did I the tired Caesar. And this man
    And when the fit was on him I did mark
    His coward lips did from their color fly,
    And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
    Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans
    Mark him and write his speeches in their books,
    So get the start of the majestic world
    And bear the palm alone. Shout.                    Flourish.
  BRUTUS. Another general shout!
    I do believe that these applauses are
  CASSIUS. Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world
    Men at some time are masters of their fates:
    Write them together, yours is as fair a name;
    Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;
    Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with 'em,
    Now, in the names of all the gods at once,
    Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
    When went there by an age since the great flood
    When could they say till now that talk'd of Rome
    When there is in it but one only man.
    O, you and I have heard our fathers say
    How I have thought of this and of these times,
    Be any further moved. What you have said
    Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
    Brutus had rather be a villager
    Under these hard conditions as this time
  CASSIUS. As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
    And all the rest look like a chidden train:
    As we have seen him in the Capitol,
  CASSIUS. Casca will tell us what the matter is.
    I do not know the man I should avoid
    Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays,
    Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
    And therefore are they very dangerous.
    I rather tell thee what is to be fear'd
  CASCA. You pull'd me by the cloak; would you speak with me?
  BRUTUS. I should not then ask Casca what had chanced.
  CASCA. Why, there was a crown offered him, and being offered him,
     he put it by with the back of his hand, thus, and then the
  BRUTUS. What was the second noise for?
  CASSIUS. They shouted thrice. What was the last cry for?
  BRUTUS. Was the crown offered him thrice?
    than other, and at every putting by mine honest neighbors
  CASSIUS. Who offered him the crown?
  BRUTUS. Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.
  CASCA. I can as well be hang'd as tell the manner of it. It was
    crown (yet 'twas not a crown neither, 'twas one of these
    it to him again; then he put it by again. But, to my thinking, he
    was very loath to lay his fingers off it. And then he offered it
    the third time; he put it the third time by; and still as he
    refused it, the rabblement hooted and clapped their chopped hands
    and threw up their sweaty nightcaps and uttered such a deal of
    stinking breath because Caesar refused the crown that it had
    and receiving the bad air.
  CASCA. He fell down in the marketplace and foamed at mouth and was
  BRUTUS. 'Tis very like. He hath the falling sickness.
    And honest Casca, we have the falling sickness.
    down. If the tagrag people did not clap him and hiss him
    according as he pleased and displeased them, as they use to do
    the players in the theatre, I am no true man.
  CASCA. Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common
    herd was glad he refused the crown, he plucked me ope his doublet
    and offered them his throat to cut. An had been a man of any
    might go to hell among the rogues. And so he fell. When he came
    he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity. Three or
    him with all their hearts. But there's no heed to be taken of
    them; if Caesar had stabbed their mothers, they would have done
  CASCA. Nay, an I tell you that, I'll ne'er look you i' the face
    again; but those that understood him smiled at one another and
    shook their heads; but for mine own part, it was Greek to me. I
    the eating.
  CASSIUS. I will do so. Till then, think of the world.
    From that it is disposed; therefore it is meet
    That noble minds keep ever with their likes;
    As if they came from several citizens,
    Writings, all tending to the great opinion
  CASCA. Are not you moved, when all the sway of earth
    I have seen tempests when the scolding winds
    Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen
    To be exalted with the threatening clouds,
    Either there is a civil strife in heaven,
    Or else the world too saucy with the gods
    Incenses them to send destruction.
    Against the Capitol I met a lion,
    Without annoying me. And there were drawn
    Transformed with their fear, who swore they saw
    Men all in fire walk up and down the streets.
    And yesterday the bird of night did sit
    Even at noonday upon the marketplace,
    Howling and shrieking. When these prodigies
    "These are their reasons; they are natural":
    For I believe they are portentous things
    Unto the climate that they point upon.
    But men may construe things after their fashion,
    Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
    Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?
    Send word to you he would be there tomorrow.
  CICERO. Good then, Casca. This disturbed sky
  CASSIUS. Who's there?
  CASCA. Who ever knew the heavens menace so?
  CASSIUS. Those that have known the earth so full of faults.
    For my part, I have walk'd about the streets,
    Submitting me unto the perilous night,
    Have bared my bosom to the thunderstone;
    And when the cross blue lightning seem'd to open
    Even in the aim and very flash of it.
  CASCA. But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?
    It is the part of men to fear and tremble
    When the most mighty gods by tokens send
    To see the strange impatience of the heavens.
    But if you would consider the true cause
    Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
    Why all these things change from their ordinance,
    That heaven hath infused them with these spirits
    To make them instruments of fear and warning
    Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man
    As doth the lion in the Capitol,
    And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.
    Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors.
    But, woe the while! Our fathers' minds are dead,
    And we are govern'd with our mothers' spirits;
  CASCA. Indeed they say the senators tomorrow
  CASSIUS. I know where I will wear this dagger then:
    Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong;
    Can be retentive to the strength of spirit;
    But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
    If I know this, know all the world besides,
  CASSIUS. And why should Caesar be a tyrant then?
    But that he sees the Romans are but sheep.
    For the base matter to illuminate
    Before a willing bondman; then I know
    Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
    As who goes farthest.
    Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans
    And I do know by this, they stay for me
    There is no stir or walking in the streets,
    And the complexion of the element
    In favor's like the work we have in hand,
    But win the noble Brutus to our party-
    And look you lay it in the praetor's chair,
    Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
    And so bestow these papers as you bade me.
    Is ours already, and the man entire
    Upon the next encounter yields him ours.
  CASCA. O, he sits high in all the people's hearts,
    I cannot, by the progress of the stars,
    But for the general. He would be crown'd:
    How that might change his nature, there's the question.
    It is the bright day that brings forth the adder
    And then, I grant, we put a sting in him
    Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;
    But when he once attains the upmost round,
    He then unto the ladder turns his back,
    Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
    Then, lest he may, prevent. And, since the quarrel
    Will bear no color for the thing he is,
    Would run to these and these extremities;
    And therefore think him as a serpent's egg
    And kill him in the shell.
    Searching the window for a flint I found
    It did not lie there when I went to bed.
                                           Gives him the letter.
    Is not tomorrow, boy, the ides of March?
  BRUTUS. Look in the calendar and bring me word.
  BRUTUS. The exhalations whizzing in the air
    Give so much light that I may read by them.
                                     Opens the letter and reads.
    Where I have took them up.
    My ancestors did from the streets of Rome
    To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
    If the redress will follow, thou receivest
    Thy full petition at the hand of Brutus!
  BRUTUS. 'Tis good. Go to the gate, somebody knocks.
    Between the acting of a dreadful thing
    And the first motion, all the interim is
    The genius and the mortal instruments
    Are then in council, and the state of man,
    Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
  LUCIUS. Sir, 'tis your brother Cassius at the door,
  LUCIUS. No, sir, there are more with him.
  BRUTUS. Do you know them?
  LUCIUS. No, sir, their hats are pluck'd about their ears,
    And half their faces buried in their cloaks,
    That by no means I may discover them
    They are the faction. O Conspiracy,
    When evils are most free? O, then, by day
    To hide thee from prevention.
    Enter the conspirators, Cassius, Casca, Decius, Cinna,
    Know I these men that come along with you?
  CASSIUS. Yes, every man of them, and no man here
  BRUTUS. He is welcome hither.
    What watchful cares do interpose themselves
  DECIUS. Here lies the east. Doth not the day break here?
    That fret the clouds are messengers of day.
    Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises,
    Which is a great way growing on the south,
    Weighing the youthful season of the year.
    Some two months hence up higher toward the north
    He first presents his fire, and the high east
    Stands as the Capitol, directly here.
  BRUTUS. No, not an oath. If not the face of men,
    The sufferance of our souls, the time's abuse-
    If these be motives weak, break off betimes,
    Till each man drop by lottery. But if these,
    As I am sure they do, bear fire enough
    The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen,
    To prick us to redress? What other bond
    Than secret Romans that have spoke the word
    And will not palter? And what other oath
    Nor the insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
    If he do break the smallest particle
    That other men begin.
    If he improve them, may well stretch so far
    Let Antony and Caesar fall together.
    To cut the head off and then hack the limbs
    We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,
    And in the spirit of men there is no blood.
    O, that we then could come by Caesar's spirit,
    Let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
    Stir up their servants to an act of rage
    Which so appearing to the common eyes,
    For in the ingrated love he bears to Caesar-
  BRUTUS. Peace, count the clock.
    Whether Caesar will come forth today or no,
    Quite from the main opinion he held once
    It may be these apparent prodigies,
    And the persuasion of his augurers
    May hold him from the Capitol today.
    He says he does, being then most flattered.
    For I can give his humor the true bent,
    And I will bring him to the Capitol.
  CASSIUS. Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
  BRUTUS. By the eighth hour. Is that the utter most?
  CINNA. Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
    Send him but hither, and I'll fashion him.
    Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber;
    Which busy care draws in the brains of men;
    Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.
  PORTIA. Nor for yours neither. have ungently, Brutus,
    And when I ask'd you what the matter was,
    I urged you further; then you scratch'd your head,
    Fearing to strengthen that impatience
    He would embrace the means to come by it.
    To walk unbraced and suck up the humors
    Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick,
    To dare the vile contagion of the night
    And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air
    Which by the right and virtue of my place
    Some six or seven, who did hide their faces
    Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,
    And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the suburbs
    As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
  PORTIA. If this were true, then should I know this secret.
    Being so father'd and so husbanded?
    Here in the thigh. Can I bear that with patience
    All my engagements I will construe to thee,
    All the charactery of my sad brows.
    Any exploit worthy the name of honor.
  LIGARIUS. By all the gods that Romans bow before,
    Yea, get the better of them. What's to do?
    I shall unfold to thee, as we are going
  BRUTUS. Follow me then.                                Exeunt.
    "Help, ho! They murther Caesar!" Who's within?
  CAESAR. Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,
    And bring me their opinions of success.
  CAESAR. Caesar shall forth: the things that threaten'd me
    Ne'er look'd but on my back; when they shall see
    The face of Caesar, they are vanished.
    Yet now they fright me. There is one within,
    Besides the things that we have heard and seen,
    Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.
    A lioness hath whelped in the streets;
    And graves have yawn'd, and yielded up their dead;
    Fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds,
    Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol;
    The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
    And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
    And I do fear them.
    Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?
    Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions
    Are to the world in general as to Caesar.
  CALPURNIA. When beggars die, there are no comets seen;
    The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.
  CAESAR. Cowards die many times before their deaths;
    Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
    What say the augurers?
    Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
    They could not find a heart within the beast.
    And I the elder and more terrible.
    That keeps you in the house and not your own.
    We'll send Mark Antony to the Senate House,
    Here's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so.
    I come to fetch you to the Senate House.
    To bear my greeting to the senators
    And tell them that I will not come today.
    I will not come today. Tell them so, Decius.
    To be afeard to tell greybeards the truth?
    Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.
    Lest I be laugh'd at when I tell them so.
    That is enough to satisfy the Senate.
    Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it.
    And these does she apply for warnings and portents
    In which so many smiling Romans bathed,
    And know it now, the Senate have concluded
    If you shall send them word you will not come,
    "Break up the Senate till another time,
    If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
    I am ashamed I did yield to them.
  CAESAR. Bid them prepare within.
    That your best friends shall wish I had been further.
    And we like friends will straightway go together.
  BRUTUS. [Aside.] That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
A street near the Capitol.
    well Metellus Cimber; Decius Brutus loves thee not; thou hast
    wronged Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in all these men,
    defend thee!
    Out of the teeth of emulation.
    If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.           Exit.
Another part of the same street, before the house of Brutus.
  PORTIA. I prithee, boy, run to the Senate House;
    Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
  PORTIA. I would have had thee there, and here again,
    Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
    Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
  PORTIA. Prithee, listen well.
    And the wind brings it from the Capitol.
                     Enter the Soothsayer.
  PORTIA. Come hither, fellow;
  SOOTHSAYER. About the ninth hour, lady.
  PORTIA. Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
    To see him pass on to the Capitol.
    Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow,
    The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,
    I'll get me to a place more void and there
    The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
    Sure, the boy heard me. Brutus hath a suit
    And bring me word what he doth say to thee.
Rome. Before the Capitol; the Senate sitting above.
A crowd of people, among them Artemidorus and the Soothsayer.
Trebonius, Cinna, Antony, Lepidus, Popilius, Publius, and others.
  CAESAR. What, is the fellow mad?
  CASSIUS. What, urge you your petitions in the street?
    Come to the Capitol.
      Caesar goes up to the Senate House, the rest follow.
    He draws Mark Antony out of the way.
  CINNA. Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
  CAESAR. I must prevent thee, Cimber.
    These couchings and these lowly courtesies
    Might fire the blood of ordinary men
    Into the law of children. Be not fond
    That will be thaw'd from the true quality
    Thy brother by decree is banished.
    I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
  METELLUS. Is there no voice more worthy than my own,
    For the repealing of my banish'd brother?
    Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may
    But I am constant as the northern star,
    There is no fellow in the firmament.
    But there's but one in all doth hold his place.
    So in the world, 'tis furnish'd well with men,
    Yet in the number I do know but one
                        Casca first, then the other Conspirators
    Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.
  CASSIUS. Some to the common pulpits and cry out
  CASCA. Go to the pulpit, Brutus.
  METELLUS. Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar's
    Nor to no Roman else. So tell them, Publius.
  CASSIUS. And leave us, Publius, lest that the people
    But we the doers.
    That we shall die, we know; 'tis but the time
  BRUTUS. Grant that, and then is death a benefit;
    And let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood
    Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords;
    Then walk we forth, even to the marketplace,
  CASSIUS. Stoop then, and wash. How many ages hence
    No worthier than the dust!
    So often shall the knot of us be call'd
    The men that gave their country liberty.
    With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.
    Thorough the hazards of this untrod state
    Falls shrewdly to the purpose.
    Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.
    If I myself, there is no hour so fit
    With the most noble blood of all this world.
    And this the bleeding business they have done.
    Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
    And pity to the general wrong of Rome-
    Of brothers' temper, do receive you in
    In the disposing of new dignities.
    The multitude, beside themselves with fear,
    And then we will deliver you the cause
    Either a coward or a flatterer.
    That I did love thee, Caesar, O, 'tis true!
    If then thy spirit look upon us now,
    Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death
    Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes,
    Most noble! In the presence of thy corse?
    Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
    Sign'd in thy spoil, and crimson'd in thy Lethe.
    O world, thou wast the forest to this hart,
    And this, indeed, O world, the heart of thee.
    Sway'd from the point by looking down on Caesar.
    That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,
    Produce his body to the marketplace,
    And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
    Speak in the order of his funeral.
    Know you how much the people may be moved
    I will myself into the pulpit first,
    And show the reason of our Caesar's death.
    In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
  BRUTUS. Prepare the body then, and follow us.
    That I am meek and gentle with these butchers!
    Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
    That ever lived in the tide of times.
    Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!
    (Which like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips
    To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue)
    A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;
    Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
    That mothers shall but smile when they behold
    Their infants quarter'd with the hands of war;
    Shall in these confines with a monarch's voice
    Cry "Havoc!" and let slip the dogs of war,
    That this foul deed shall smell above the earth
    O Caesar!                                     Sees the body.
  ANTONY. Thy heart is big; get thee apart and weep.
    Into the marketplace. There shall I try,
    In my oration, how the people take
    The cruel issue of these bloody men,
    According to the which thou shalt discourse
    To young Octavius of the state of things.
    Cassius, go you into the other street
    And part the numbers.
  SECOND CITIZEN. I will hear Cassius and compare their reasons,
    When severally we hear them rendered.
                                    Brutus goes into the pulpit.
  BRUTUS. Be patient till the last.
    wisdom, and awake your senses, that you may the better judge. If
    there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of Caesar's, to
    then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is
    more. Had you rather Caesar were living and die all slaves, than
    enrolled in the Capitol, his glory not extenuated, wherein he was
              Enter Antony and others, with Caesar's body.
    no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying, a
    place in the commonwealth, as which of you shall not? With this I
    depart- that, as I slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I
    have the same dagger for myself, when it shall please my country
  THIRD CITIZEN. Let him go up into the public chair;
                                           Goes into the pulpit.
    The evil that men do lives after them,
    The good is oft interred with their bones;
    Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest-
    So are they all, all honorable men-
    Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.
    When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
    You all did see that on the Lupercal
    What cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
    And men have lost their reason. Bear with me;
    My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
  FIRST CITIZEN. Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
  SECOND CITIZEN. If thou consider rightly of the matter,
    I fear there will a worse come in his place.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Mark'd ye his words? He would not take the crown;
  ANTONY. But yesterday the word of Caesar might
    Have stood against the world. Now lies he there,
    I will not do them wrong; I rather choose
    To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
    But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar;
    Let but the commons hear this testament-
    And they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds
    And dip their napkins in his sacred blood,
    And, dying, mention it within their wills,
    Unto their issue.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. We'll hear the will. Read it, Mark Antony.
  ALL. The will, the will! We will hear Caesar's will.
    And, being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Read the will; we'll hear it, Antony.
    You shall read us the will, Caesar's will.
    I fear I wrong the honorable men
  SECOND CITIZEN. They were villains, murtherers. The will!
    Read the will!
  ANTONY. You will compel me then to read the will?
    Then make a ring about the corse of Caesar,
    And let me show you him that made the will.
                                  He comes down from the pulpit.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Stand from the hearse, stand from the body.
  ANTONY. If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
    That day he overcame the Nervii.
    See what a rent the envious Casca made;
    Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb'd;
    Mark how the blood of Caesar follow'd it,
    This was the most unkindest cut of all;
    For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
    Even at the base of Pompey's statue,
    Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell.
    O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!
  FIRST CITIZEN. Peace there! Hear the noble Antony.
    What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
    That made them do it. They are wise and honorable,
    That love my friend, and that they know full well
    For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
    Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
    And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus,
    And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
  FIRST CITIZEN. We'll burn the house of Brutus.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Away, then! Come, seek the conspirators.
    Alas, you know not; I must tell you then.
    You have forgot the will I told you of.
  ALL. Most true, the will! Let's stay and hear the will.
  ANTONY. Here is the will, and under Caesar's seal.
    On this side Tiber; he hath left them you,
    Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?
    We'll burn his body in the holy place
    And with the brands fire the traitors' houses.
    Take up the body.
                                  Exeunt Citizens with the body.
  ANTONY. And thither will I straight to visit him.
    Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.
  ANTONY. Be like they had some notice of the people,
    How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius.          Exeunt.
Enter Cinna the poet.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Whither are you going?
  CINNA. What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I dwell? Am I
  SECOND CITIZEN. That's as much as to say they are fools that marry.
  CINNA. Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.
  CINNA. I am Cinna the poet, I am Cinna the poet.
  CINNA. I am not Cinna the conspirator.
  ANTONY. These many then shall die, their names are prick'd.
  OCTAVIUS. Your brother too must die; consent you, Lepidus?
    Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
  OCTAVIUS. Or here, or at the Capitol.            Exit Lepidus.
    One of the three to share it?
    And though we lay these honors on this man
    He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
    To groan and sweat under the business,
    Either led or driven, as we point the way;
    Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears
    Which, out of use and staled by other men,
  OCTAVIUS. Let us do so, for we are at the stake,
    And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
Enter Brutus, Lucilius, Lucius, and Soldiers; Titinius and Pindarus meet them.
  LUCILIUS. Give the word, ho, and stand.
    Make gallant show and promise of their mettle;
    But when they should endure the bloody spur,
    They fall their crests and like deceitful jades
    Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?
    The greater part, the horse in general,
  BRUTUS. Stand, ho! Speak the word along.
  CASSIUS. Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
    And, if not so, how should I wrong a brother?
    And when you do them-
    Before the eyes of both our armies here,
    Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away;
    Bid our commanders lead their charges off
  BRUTUS. Lucilius, do you the like, and let no man
    For taking bribes here of the Sardians,
    Because I knew the man, were slighted off.
    Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
    And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
  BRUTUS. Remember March, the ides of March remember.
    That struck the foremost man of all this world
    And sell the mighty space of our large honors
    I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
    Have mind upon your health, tempt me no farther.
    Under your testy humor? By the gods,
    You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
    That they pass by me as the idle wind
    By heaven, I had rather coin my heart
    From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
    But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
  BRUTUS. I do not, till you practise them on me.
  BRUTUS. A flatterer's would not, though they do appear
    For Cassius is aweary of the world:
    Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
    I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
  BRUTUS. Sheathe your dagger.
    That carries anger as the flint bears fire,
  BRUTUS. What's the matter?
    When that rash humor which my mother gave me
    He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.
  POET. [Within.] Let me go in to see the generals.
  LUCILIUS. [Within.] You shall not come to them.
  CASSIUS. How now, what's the matter?
    What should the wars do with these jigging fools?
  BRUTUS. Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders
    Prepare to lodge their companies tonight.
    Have made themselves so strong- for with her death
  Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup;
    Bending their expedition toward Philippi.
  MESSALA. Myself have letters of the selfsame tenure.
    By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.
  MESSALA. Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell:
    I have the patience to endure it now.
    'Tis better that the enemy seek us;
    For they have grudged us contribution.
    The enemy, marching along by them,
    By them shall make a fuller number up,
    If at Philippi we do face him there,
  CASSIUS. Hear me, good brother.
    That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
    We, at the height, are ready to decline.
    There is a tide in the affairs of men
    Which taken at the flood leads on to fortune;
    Omitted, all the voyage of their life
    And we must take the current when it serves,
    We'll along ourselves and meet them at Philippi.
  CASSIUS. O my dear brother!
    This was an ill beginning of the night.
  BRUTUS. Good night, good brother.
               Re-enter Lucius, with the gown.
    Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?
  LUCIUS. Here in the tent.
    Poor knave, I blame thee not, thou art o'erwatch'd.
    Call Claudio and some other of my men,
    I'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.
    On business to my brother Cassius.
    It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
    Look Lucius, here's the book I sought for so;
    I put it in the pocket of my gown.
    I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
    I will not hold thee long. If I do live,
    I will be good to thee.                   Music, and a song.
    This is a sleepy tune. O murtherous slumber,
    That plays thee music? Gentle knave, good night.
    I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee.
    I'll take it from thee; and, good boy, good night.
    Let me see, let me see; is not the leaf turn'd down
                 Enter the Ghost of Caesar.
    I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
  GHOST. To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.
  BRUTUS. Well, then I shall see thee again?
  BRUTUS. Why, I will see thee at Philippi then.     Exit Ghost.
    Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.
  BRUTUS. Go and commend me to my brother Cassius;
Enter Octavius, Antony, and their Army.
    You said the enemy would not come down,
    But keep the hills and upper regions.
    Answering before we do demand of them.
  ANTONY. Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know
    Wherefore they do it. They could be content
    To visit other places, and come down
    To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage;
    Upon the left hand of the even field.
  OCTAVIUS. Upon the right hand I, keep thou the left.
      March. Drum. Enter Brutus, Cassius, and their Army;
           Lucilius, Titinius, Messala, and others.
  ANTONY. No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.
    Make forth, the generals would have some words.
  OCTAVIUS. Stir not until the signal not until the signal.
    Witness the hole you made in Caesar's heart,
    But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,
    And leave them honeyless.
    For you have stol'n their buzzing, Antony,
    Hack'd one another in the sides of Caesar.
    Strooke Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!
  OCTAVIUS. Come, come, the cause. If arguing make us sweat,
    When think you that the sword goes up again?
    Be well avenged, or till another Caesar
    Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.
    Unless thou bring'st them with thee.
  BRUTUS. O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
    If you dare fight today, come to the field;
                        Exeunt Octavius, Antony, and their Army.
    The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
    Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perch'd,
    This morning are they fled away and gone,
    And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
    Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.
    But, since the affairs of men rest still incertain,
    Let's reason with the worst that may befall.
    If we do lose this battle, then is this
    The very last time we shall speak together.
    What are you then determined to do?
  BRUTUS. Even by the rule of that philosophy
    By which I did blame Cato for the death
    To stay the providence of some high powers
    Thorough the streets of Rome?
    Must end that work the ides of March begun.
    And whether we shall meet again I know not.
    If not, why then this parting was well made.
  BRUTUS. Why then, lead on. O, that a man might know
    But it sufficeth that the day will end,
    And then the end is known. Come, ho! Away!           Exeunt.
  BRUTUS. Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
    Unto the legions on the other side.             Loud alarum.
    Let them set on at once, for I perceive
    And sudden push gives them the overthrow.
    Ride, ride, Messala. Let them all come down.         Exeunt.
Another part of the field.
  CASSIUS. O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!
    I slew the coward, and did take it from him.
  TITINIUS. O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
  PINDARUS. Fly further off, my lord, fly further off;
    Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
    Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
    Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
    Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.
    And tell me what thou notest about the field.
                                      Pindarus ascends the hill.
    This day I breathed first: time is come round,
    And where I did begin, there shall I end;
    With horsemen, that make to him on the spur;
    Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.
    Come hither, sirrah.
    In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,
    And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
    That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
    Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts;
    Guide thou the sword. [Pindarus stabs him.] Caesar, thou art
    Even with the sword that kill'd thee.                  Dies.
  MESSALA. Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
  TITINIUS. He lies not like the living. O my heart!
    Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
    But kill'st the mother that engender'd thee!
    Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
    And I will seek for Pindarus the while.        Exit Messala.
    Did I not meet thy friends? And did not they
    And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts?
    But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow;
    Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
                         and others.
  BRUTUS. Are yet two Romans living such as these?
    The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!
    Come therefore, and to Thasos send his body;
    And come, young Cato; let us to the field.
Another part of the field.
Alarum. Enter, fighting, Soldiers of both armies; then Brutus, young Cato,
Lucilius, and others.
    I will proclaim my name about the field.
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
  FIRST SOLDIER. I'll tell the news. Here comes the general.
    I dare assure thee that no enemy
    Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus;
    Give him all kindness; I had rather have
Another part of the field.
  CLITUS. Statilius show'd the torchlight, but, my lord,
  BRUTUS. Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word:
    It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus.        Whispers.
  CLITUS. What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.
  BRUTUS. Peace then, no words.
  CLITUS. I'll rather kill myself.
  BRUTUS. Hark thee, Dardanius.                        Whispers.
  CLITUS. What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
  BRUTUS. Come hither, good Volumnius, list a word.
    Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes;
    Our enemies have beat us to the pit;            Low alarums.
    Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,
    Thou know'st that we two went to school together;
    Even for that our love of old, I prithee,
  CLITUS. Fly, fly, my lord, there is no tarrying here.
    Farewell to thee too, Strato. Countrymen,
    I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord.
    Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
    I kill'd not thee with half so good a will.            Dies.
                 Lucilius, and the Army.
  STRATO. Free from the bondage you are in, Messala:
  LUCILIUS. So Brutus should be found. I thank thee, Brutus,
  OCTAVIUS. All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.
  STRATO. I held the sword, and he did run on it.
  MESSALA. Octavius, then take him to follow thee
    That did the latest service to my master.
  ANTONY. This was the noblest Roman of them all.
    All the conspirators, save only he,
    Did that they did in envy of great Caesar;
    And common good to all, made one of them.
    His life was gentle, and the elements
    And say to all the world, "This was a man!"
    So call the field to rest, and let's away,
    To part the glories of this happy day.              Exeunt.
  Kent. I thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany than
  Glou. It did always seem so to us; but now, in the division of the
     kingdom, it appears not which of the Dukes he values most, for
     equalities are so weigh'd that curiosity in neither can make
     choice of either's moiety.
  Glou. Sir, this young fellow's mother could; whereupon she grew
  Kent. I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so
     something saucily into the world before he was sent for, yet was
     his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the
      Enter one bearing a coronet; then Lear; then the Dukes of
  Lear. Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.
     Give me the map there. Know we have divided
     Conferring them on younger strengths while we
     Unburthen'd crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
     Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
  Gon. Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter;
     As much as child e'er lov'd, or father found;
  Lear. Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
     We make thee lady. To thine and Albany's issue
     Of the selfsame metal that my sister is,
     Myself an enemy to all other joys
     Which the most precious square of sense possesses,
  Lear. To thee and thine hereditary ever
     Although the last, not least; to whose young love
     Why have my sisters husbands, if they say
     To love my father all.
  Lear. Let it be so! thy truth then be thy dower!
     For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
     The mysteries of Hecate and the night;
     By all the operation of the orbs
     Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
     Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
     Her father's heart from her! Call France! Who stirs?
     Preeminence, and all the large effects
     Revenue, execution of the rest,
     Lov'd as my father, as my master follow'd,
  Lear. The bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft.
  Kent. Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
     Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
     Thy safety being the motive.
     Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
     Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,
     I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
     Five days we do allot thee for provision
     To shield thee from diseases of the world,
     And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
     Upon our kingdom. If, on the tenth day following,
  Kent. Fare thee well, King. Since thus thou wilt appear,
     [To Cordelia] The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
     Hath rivall'd for our daughter. What in the least
     But now her price is fall'n. Sir, there she stands.
     She's there, and she is yours.
  Lear. Then leave her, sir; for, by the pow'r that made me,
     To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you
     It is no vicious blot, murther, or foulness,
     Which often leaves the history unspoke
     What say you to the lady? Love's not love
     And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
  Bur. I am sorry then you have so lost a father
     Gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect
     Not all the dukes in wat'rish Burgundy
     Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind.
  Cor. The jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes
     Your faults as they are nam'd. Use well our father.
     And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
     Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.
     appertains to us both. I think our father will hence to-night.
  Reg. 'Tis the infirmity of his age; yet he hath ever but slenderly
  Gon. The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then
     must we look to receive from his age, not alone the
     imperfections of long-ingraffed condition, but therewithal
     the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with
     them.
  Gon. There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and
     him. Pray you let's hit together. If our father carry authority
  Reg. We shall further think on't.
Enter [Edmund the] Bastard solus, [with a letter].
     Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
     Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base?
     As honest madam's issue? Why brand they us
     Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
     Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well then,
     Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
     And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
     And the King gone to-night? subscrib'd his pow'r?
     Upon the gad? Edmund, how now? What news?
                                           [Puts up the letter.]
  Glou. No? What needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your
  Edm. I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter from my brother
  Glou. Give me the letter, sir.
  Edm. I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The contents, as
     in part I understand them, are to blame.
  Edm. I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote this but as
  Glou. (reads) 'This policy and reverence of age makes the world
     bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes from us
     till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle
     and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways,
     of this I may speak more. If our father would sleep till I
     the beloved of your brother,
  Edm. It was not brought me, my lord: there's the cunning of it. I
     found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.
  Glou. You know the character to be your brother's?
  Edm. If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his;
  Edm. It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is not in the
     that, sons at perfect age, and fathers declining, the father
     should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.
  Glou. O villain, villain! His very opinion in the letter! Abhorred
     your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him
     in pieces the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life
     honour, and to no other pretence of danger.
     satisfaction, and that without any further delay than this very
  Glou. To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him.
     you; frame the business after your own wisdom. I would unstate
  Edm. I will seek him, sir, presently; convey the business as I
  Glou. These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to
     us. Though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet
     nature finds itself scourg'd by the sequent effects. Love cools,
     friendship falls off, brothers divide. In cities, mutinies; in
     countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond crack'd
     'twixt son and father. This villain of mine comes under the
     prediction; there's son against father: the King falls from bias
     of nature; there's father against child. We have seen the best
     this villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it
     carefully. And the noble and true-hearted Kent banish'd! his
  Edm. This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are
     sick in fortune, often the surfeit of our own behaviour, we make
     guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as if
     his goatish disposition to the charge of a star! My father
     compounded with my mother under the Dragon's Tail, and my
     lecherous. Fut! I should have been that I am, had the
     maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing.
     and pat! he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy. My
     O, these eclipses do portend these divisions! Fa, sol, la, mi.
  Edg. How now, brother Edmund? What serious contemplation are you
  Edm. I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day,
     what should follow these eclipses.
  Edm. I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily: as
     of unnaturalness between the child and the parent; death,
  Edm. Come, come! When saw you my father last?
  Edg. Ay, two hours together.
     qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so
     rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would
     the speed of his rage goes slower; and, as I say, retire with me
  Edg. Arm'd, brother?
  Edm. Brother, I advise you to the best. Go arm'd. I am no honest man
     if there be any good meaning toward you. I have told you what I
     have seen and heard; but faintly, nothing like the image and
     A credulous father! and a brother noble,
     My practices ride easy! I see the business.
  Gon. Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
     He flashes into one gross crime or other
     You shall do well; the fault of it I'll answer.
     With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abus'd.
  Kent. If but as well I other accents borrow,
     Shall find thee full of labours.
  Kent. A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.
     ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified in, and the best of me
  Lear. Follow me; thou shalt serve me. If I like thee no worse after
     dinner, I will not part from thee yet. Dinner, ho, dinner!
     Where's my knave? my fool? Go you and call my fool hither.
                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
  Lear. What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.
     [Exit a Knight.] Where's my fool, ho? I think the world's
  Lear. Why came not the slave back to me when I call'd him?
  Knight. Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.
  Knight. My lord, I know not what the matter is; but to my judgment
     as well in the general dependants as in the Duke himself also
     perceived a most faint neglect of late, which I have rather
     and purpose of unkindness. I will look further into't. But
  Knight. Since my young lady's going into France, sir, the fool
     hither my fool.
                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
     O, you, sir, you! Come you hither, sir. Who am I, sir?
  Osw. My lady's father.
  Lear. 'My lady's father'? My lord's knave! You whoreson dog! you
  Osw. I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.
  Kent. Nor tripp'd neither, you base football player?
  Lear. I thank thee, fellow. Thou serv'st me, and I'll love thee.
  Lear. Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee. There's earnest of thy
     canst not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch cold shortly.
     daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will. If
  Fool. If I gave them all my living, I'ld keep my coxcombs myself.
     There's mine! beg another of thy daughters.
  Lear. Take heed, sirrah- the whip.
     Lady the brach may stand by th' fire and stink.
  Fool. Sirrah, I'll teach thee a speech.
  Fool. Then 'tis like the breath of an unfeed lawyer- you gave me
  Fool. [to Kent] Prithee tell him, so much the rent of his land
  Fool. Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter
  Fool.   That lord that counsell'd thee
            The other found out there.
  Fool. All thy other titles thou hast given away; that thou wast
  Kent. This is not altogether fool, my lord.
     monopoly out, they would have part on't. And ladies too, they
     will not let me have all the fool to myself; they'll be
     snatching. Give me an egg, nuncle, and I'll give thee two
  Lear. What two crowns shall they be?
  Fool. Why, after I have cut the egg i' th' middle and eat up the
     meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou clovest thy crown i'
     thy back o'er the dirt. Thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown
                They know not how their wits to wear,
     thy mother; for when thou gav'st them the rod, and put'st down
     [Sings]    Then they for sudden joy did weep,
                  And go the fools among.
     Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to
     and sometimes I am whipp'd for holding my peace. I had rather be
     any kind o' thing than a fool! And yet I would not be thee,
     i' th' middle. Here comes one o' the parings.
     But other of your insolent retinue
     By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
     Would not scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
     Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,
     Might in their working do you that offence
     Which else were shame, that then necessity
          The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long
     So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
  Fool. May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse?
     Whoop, Jug, I love thee!
     Either his notion weakens, his discernings
  Lear. I would learn that; for, by the marks of sovereignty,
  Fool. Which they will make an obedient father.
     Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
     That this our court, infected with their manners,
     Make it more like a tavern or a brothel
     For instant remedy. Be then desir'd
     By her that else will take the thing she begs
     And the remainder that shall still depend
     Which know themselves, and you.
     Saddle my horses! Call my train together!
     Degenerate bastard, I'll not trouble thee;
     Make servants of their betters.
     More hideous when thou show'st thee in a child
     Than the sea-monster!
     And in the most exact regard support
     The worships of their name.- O most small fault,
     From the fix'd place; drew from my heart all love
     And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!
     Dry up in her the organs of increase;
     Turn all her mother's pains and benefits
  Gon. Never afflict yourself to know the cause;
  Alb. What's the matter, sir?
  Lear. I'll tell thee. [To Goneril] Life and death! I am asham'd
     That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
     Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee!
     Th' untented woundings of a father's curse
     Pierce every sense about thee!- Old fond eyes,
     And cast you, with the waters that you lose,
     When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
     That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think
     I have cast off for ever; thou shalt, I warrant thee.
     To the great love I bear you -
     [To the Fool] You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master!
  Fool. Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry! Take the fool with thee.
          Should sure to the slaughter,
          So the fool follows after.                       Exit.
     He may enguard his dotage with their pow'rs
     Let me still take away the harms I fear,
                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
     And thereto add such reasons of your own
  Gon. Nay then-
Court before the Duke of Albany's Palace.
  Lear. Go you before to Gloucester with these letters. Acquaint my
     daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her
     demand out of the letter. If your diligence be not speedy, I
     shall be there afore you.
  Fool. Then I prithee be merry. Thy wit shall ne'er go slip-shod.
  Fool. Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly; for though
  Fool. Why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose, that what a
  Fool. Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.
  Lear. I will forget my nature. So kind a father!- Be my horses
  Fool. Thy asses are gone about 'em. The reason why the seven stars
  Lear. Because they are not eight?
  Fool. If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I'ld have thee beaten for being
     How now? Are the horses ready?
A court within the Castle of the Earl of Gloucester.
Enter [Edmund the] Bastard and Curan, meeting.
  Edm. Save thee, Curan.
  Cur. And you, sir. I have been with your father, and given him
     notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his Duchess will be
  Cur. Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad- I mean the
     whisper'd ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments?
  Edm. Not I. Pray you, what are they?
  Cur. Have you heard of no likely wars toward 'twixt the two Dukes
  Cur. You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.      Exit.
     My father hath set guard to take my brother;
     Brother, a word! Descend! Brother, I say!
     My father watches. O sir, fly this place!
     You have now the good advantage of the night.
     Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
     He's coming hither; now, i' th' night, i' th' haste,
     Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany?
  Edm. I hear my father coming. Pardon me!
     Yield! Come before my father. Light, ho, here!
     Fly, brother.- Torches, torches!- So farewell.
     Do more than this in sport.- Father, father!-
  Glou. Now, Edmund, where's the villain?
  Edm. Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
     Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
  Glou. Where is the villain, Edmund?
  Edm. Persuade me to the murther of your lordship;
     But that I told him the revenging gods
     'Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;
     The child was bound to th' father- sir, in fine,
     Bold in the quarrel's right, rous'd to th' encounter,
     Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
     Bringing the murderous caitiff to the stake;
     If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
     Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
     And thou must make a dullard of the world,
     If they not thought the profits of my death
     To make thee seek it.'
     Hark, the Duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes.
     All ports I'll bar; the villain shall not scape;
     I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
     Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means
     To make thee capable.
  Corn. How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither
  Reg. What, did my father's godson seek your life?
     He whom my father nam'd? Your Edgar?
  Reg. Was he not companion with the riotous knights
     That tend upon my father?
  Reg. No marvel then though he were ill affected.
     'Tis they have put him on the old man's death,
     Been well inform'd of them, and with such cautions
     That, if they come to sojourn at my house,
     I'll not be there.
  Corn. Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
     Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
     Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
     Which craves the instant use.
Enter Kent and [Oswald the] Steward, severally.
  Osw. Good dawning to thee, friend. Art of this house?
  Osw. Prithee, if thou lov'st me, tell me.
  Kent. I love thee not.
  Osw. Why then, I care not for thee.
  Kent. If I had thee in Lipsbury Pinfold, I would make thee care for
  Osw. Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
  Kent. Fellow, I know thee.
     good service, and art nothing but the composition of a knave,
     beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch;
     one whom I will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deny the
     that's neither known of thee nor knows thee!
     Is it two days ago since I beat thee and tripp'd up thy heels
     before the King? [Draws his sword.] Draw, you rogue! for, though
     it be night, yet the moon shines. I'll make a sop o' th'
  Osw. Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
  Kent. Draw, you rascal! You come with letters against the King, and
     take Vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her father.
  Osw. Help, ho! murther! help!
  Osw. Help, ho! murther! murther!
  Edm. How now? What's the matter?                 Parts [them].
  Glou. Weapons? arms? What's the matter here?
     He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?
  Reg. The messengers from our sister and the King
     rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.
     made him so ill, though he had been but two hours at the trade.
     mortar and daub the walls of a jakes with him. 'Spare my grey
     Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
     Like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain
     That in the natures of their lords rebel,
     Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
     Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
     With every gale and vary of their masters,
     A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
     An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.
     That stretch their duties nicely.
     Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
     It pleas'd the King his master very late
     That worthied him, got praises of the King
     And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
  Kent. None of these rogues and cowards
     But Ajax is their fool.
  Corn. Fetch forth the stocks!
     Call not your stocks for me. I serve the King;
     Against the grace and person of my master,
  Corn. Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,
  Kent. Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,
  Corn. This is a fellow of the selfsame colour
     Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!
     His fault is much, and the good King his master
                                    [Kent is put in the stocks.]
  Glou. I am sorry for thee, friend. 'Tis the Duke's pleasure,
     Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
     Will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd. I'll entreat for thee.
     Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.
  Kent. Good King, that must approve the common saw,
     To the warm sun!
     Losses their remedies'- All weary and o'erwatch'd,
     And by the happy hollow of a tree
     Escap'd the hunt. No port is free, no place
     To take the basest and most poorest shape
     The winds and persecutions of the sky.
     Strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms
     Enforce their charity. 'Poor Turlygod! poor Tom!'
Before Gloucester's Castle; Kent in the stocks.
  Lear. 'Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
     The night before there was no purpose in them
  Kent. Hail to thee, noble master!
  Fool. Ha, ha! look! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied by the
     by th' legs. When a man's over-lusty at legs, then he wears
     wooden nether-stocks.
     To set thee here?
  Lear. No, no, they would not!
  Kent. Yes, they have.
     They would not, could not do't. 'Tis worse than murther
     Thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage,
  Kent. My lord, when at their home
     I did commend your Highness' letters to them,
     Ere I was risen from the place that show'd
     My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
     Which presently they read; on whose contents,
     They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse,
     The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks,
     And meeting here the other messenger,
     Being the very fellow which of late
     He rais'd the house with loud and coward cries.
  Fool. Winter's not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way.
          Fathers that wear rags
            Do make their children blind;
          But fathers that bear bags
            Shall see their children kind.
          Ne'er turns the key to th' poor.
  Lear. O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
  Kent. With the Earl, sir, here within.
     How chance the King comes with so small a number?
  Fool. We'll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee there's no
     labouring i' th' winter. All that follow their noses are led by
     their eyes but blind men, and there's not a nose among twenty
     it; but the great one that goes upward, let him draw thee after.
     When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again. I
            And leave thee in the storm.
          But I will tarry; the fool will stay,
            And let the wise man fly.
  Lear. Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?
     They have travell'd all the night? Mere fetches-
     You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
     I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.
  Glou. Well, my good lord, I have inform'd them so.
  Lear. Inform'd them? Dost thou understand me, man?
  Lear. The King would speak with Cornwall; the dear father
     Are they inform'd of this? My breath and blood!
     Fiery? the fiery Duke? Tell the hot Duke that-
     When nature, being oppress'd, commands the mind
     To suffer with the body. I'll forbear;
     To take the indispos'd and sickly fit
     For the sound man.- Death on my state! Wherefore
     That this remotion of the Duke and her
     Go tell the Duke and 's wife I'ld speak with them-
     Now, presently. Bid them come forth and hear me,
     Or at their chamber door I'll beat the drum
  Fool. Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she
     a stick and cried 'Down, wantons, down!' 'Twas her brother that,
     I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,
     Some other time for that.- Beloved Regan,
     I can scarce speak to thee. Thou'lt not believe
  Reg. I cannot think my sister in the least
     She have restrain'd the riots of your followers,
     Nature in you stands on the very verge
     Do you but mark how this becomes the house:
     Most serpent-like, upon the very heart.
     All the stor'd vengeances of heaven fall
     You fen-suck'd fogs, drawn by the pow'rful sun,
  Reg. O the blest gods! so will you wish on me
     When the rash mood is on.
     Do comfort, and not burn. 'Tis not in thee
     And, in conclusion, to oppose the bolt
     Wherein I thee endow'd.
                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
     Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.
     O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?
  Corn. I set him there, sir; but his own disorders
  Reg. I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
     If, till the expiration of your month,
     Dismissing half your train, come then to me.
     No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
     To wage against the enmity o' th' air,
     To be a comrade with the wolf and owl-
     Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took
     Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
  Lear. I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad.
     I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell.
     We'll no more meet, no more see one another.
     Or rather a disease that's in my flesh,
     In my corrupted blood. But I'll not chide thee.
     I do not bid the Thunder-bearer shoot
     Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove.
  Reg. Not altogether so.
  Reg. Why not, my lord? If then they chanc'd to slack ye,
     We could control them. If you will come to me
     When others are more wicked; not being the worst
     Stands in some rank of praise. [To Goneril] I'll go with thee.
  Lear. O, reason not the need! Our basest beggars
     Are in the poorest thing superfluous.
     Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true need-
     If it be you that stirs these daughters' hearts
     Against their father, fool me not so much
     That all the world shall- I will do such things-
     What they are yet, I know not; but they shall be
     The terrors of the earth! You think I'll weep.
  Reg. This house is little; the old man and 's people
  Corn. Followed the old man forth.
  Corn. Whither is he going?
  Glou. He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.
  Glou. Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds
     The injuries that they themselves procure
     Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors.
     And what they may incense him to, being apt
  Kent. Who's there, besides foul weather?
  Gent. One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
  Kent. I know you. Where's the King?
  Gent. Contending with the fretful elements;
     Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
     Or swell the curled waters 'bove the main,
     Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,
     Catch in their fury and make nothing of;
     This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
     The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
     Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
  Gent. None but the fool, who labours to outjest
     And dare upon the warrant of my note
     (Although as yet the face of it be cover'd
     Who have (as who have not, that their great stars
     Which are to France the spies and speculations
     Either in snuffs and packings of the Dukes,
     Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
     Against the old kind King, or something deeper,
     Whereof, perchance, these are but furnishings-
     But, true it is, from France there comes a power
     To show their open banner. Now to you:
  Gent. I will talk further with you.
     I will go seek the King.
     That, when we have found the King (in which your pain
     Holla the other.
Another part of the heath.
     Till you have drench'd our steeples, drown'd the cocks!
     Strike flat the thick rotundity o' th' world,
     blessing! Here's a night pities nether wise men nor fools.
            Before the head has any,
     For there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a
  Lear. No, I will be the pattern of all patience;
  Kent. Who's there?
     Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies
     Gallow the very wanderers of the dark
     And make them keep their caves. Since I was man,
     Th' affliction nor the fear.
  Lear. Let the great gods,
     Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,
     That hast within thee undivulged crimes
     Unwhipp'd of justice. Hide thee, thou bloody hand;
     Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest.
     Repose you there, whilst I to this hard house
     (More harder than the stones whereof 'tis rais'd,
     That's sorry yet for thee.
            With hey, ho, the wind and the rain-
             For the rain it raineth every day.
          When brewers mar their malt with water;
          When nobles are their tailors' tutors,
          When usurers tell their gold i' th' field,
          Then shall the realm of Albion
          Then comes the time, who lives to see't,
     I desir'd their leave that I might pity him, they took from me
     the use of mine own house, charg'd me on pain of perpetual
     displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for him, nor any
  Glou. Go to; say you nothing. There is division betwixt the Dukes,
     night- 'tis dangerous to be spoken- I have lock'd the letter in
     my closet. These injuries the King now bears will be revenged
     home; there's part of a power already footed; we must incline to
     the King. I will seek him and privily relieve him. Go you and
     maintain talk with the Duke, that my charity be not of him
     die for't, as no less is threat'ned me, the King my old master
  Edm. This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the Duke
     That which my father loses- no less than all.
     The younger rises when the old doth fall.             Exit.
  Kent. Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter.
     The tyranny of the open night 's too rough
  Kent. I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
     Invades us to the skin. So 'tis to thee;
     But where the greater malady is fix'd,
     But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
     Thou'dst meet the bear i' th' mouth. When the mind's free,
     Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!
     Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all!
  Lear. Prithee go in thyself; seek thine own ease.
     [To the Fool] In, boy; go first.- You houseless poverty-
     Nay, get thee in. I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.
     That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
     From seasons such as these? O, I have ta'en
     That thou mayst shake the superflux to them
     And show the heavens more just.
                     Enter Fool [from the hovel].
  Kent. Give me thy hand. Who's there?
  Kent. What art thou that dost grumble there i' th' straw?
  Edg. Away! the foul fiend follows me! Through the sharp hawthorn
     blows the cold wind. Humh! go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.
  Edg. Who gives anything to poor Tom? whom the foul fiend hath led
     wits! Tom 's acold. O, do de, do de, do de. Bless thee from
     whom the foul fiend vexes. There could I have him now- and there-
     and there again- and there!
  Lear. Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
     Is it the fashion that discarded fathers
     Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
     wore gloves in my cap; serv'd the lust of my mistress' heart and
     did the act of darkness with her; swore as many oaths as I spake
     words, and broke them in the sweet face of heaven; one that
     slept in the contriving of lust, and wak'd to do it. Wine lov'd
     I deeply, dice dearly; and in woman out-paramour'd the Turk.
     Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray
     thy poor heart to woman. Keep thy foot out of brothel, thy hand
     out of placket, thy pen from lender's book, and defy the foul
     fiend. Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind; says
     uncover'd body this extremity of the skies. Is man no more than
     this? Consider him well. Thou ow'st the worm no silk, the beast
     no hide, the sheep no wool, the cat no perfume. Ha! Here's three
     on's are sophisticated! Thou art the thing itself;
                                         [Tears at his clothes.]
  Fool. Prithee, nuncle, be contented! 'Tis a naughty night to swim
     heart- a small spark, all the rest on's body cold. Look, here
  Edg. This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet. He begins at curfew,
     and walks till the first cock. He gives the web and the pin,
     squints the eye, and makes the harelip; mildews the white wheat,
     and hurts the poor creature of earth.
           Saint Withold footed thrice the 'old;
           He met the nightmare, and her nine fold;
           And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!
  Kent. Who's there? What is't you seek?
  Glou. What are you there? Your names?
  Edg. Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the todpole,
     the wall-newt and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when
     the foul fiend rages, eats cow-dung for sallets, swallows the
     old rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the
     Though their injunction be to bar my doors
     What is the cause of thunder?
  Edg. How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.
     Thou say'st the King grows mad: I'll tell thee, friend,
     No father his son dearer. True to tell thee,
  Glou. In, fellow, there, into th' hovel; keep thee warm.
  Kent. Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
  Lear. Come, good Athenian.
  Edg. Child Rowland to the dark tower came;
          I smell the blood of a British man.
  Corn. I now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil
     This is the letter he spoke of, which approves him an
     intelligent party to the advantages of France. O heavens! that
     this treason were not- or not I the detector!
  Corn. Go with me to the Duchess.
  Edm. If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty
  Corn. True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester.
     Seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our
  Edm. [aside] If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his
     though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.
  Corn. I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer
     father in my love.
  Glou. Here is better than the open air; take it thankfully. I will
     piece out the comfort with what addition I can. I will not be
  Kent. All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience.
  Edg. Frateretto calls me, and tells me Nero is an angler in the
     lake of darkness. Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
  Fool. Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a
  Fool. He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse's
  Lear. It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.
     [To the Fool] Thou, sapient sir, sit here. Now, you she-foxes!
             Come o'er the bourn, Bessy, to me.
           Why she dares not come over to thee.
  Edg. The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a nightingale.
     not, black angel; I have no food for thee.
     Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
  Lear. I'll see their trial first. Bring in their evidence.
     [To the Fool] And thou, his yokefellow of equity,
            Thy sheep be in the corn;
     Purr! the cat is gray.
     this honourable assembly, she kicked the poor King her father.
  Fool. Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?
  Lear. And here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim
     What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!
     Arms, arms! sword! fire! Corruption in the place!
  Kent. O pity! Sir, where is the patience now
     Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart, see, they bark at me.
  Edg. Tom will throw his head at them. Avaunt, you curs!
           Tom will make them weep and wail;
           Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.
  Lear. Then let them anatomize Regan. See what breeds about her
     heart. Is there any cause in nature that makes these hard
     hundred; only I do not like the fashion of your garments. You'll
     say they are Persian attire; but let them be chang'd.
  Lear. Make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains.
  Glou. Come hither, friend. Where is the King my master?
  Glou. Good friend, I prithee take him in thy arms.
     Give thee quick conduct.
     Stand in hard cure. [To the Fool] Come, help to bear thy master.
     But then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip
     When that which makes me bend makes the King bow,
     He childed as I fathered! Tom, away!
     Mark the high noises, and thyself bewray
     When false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee,
     In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.
     What will hap more to-night, safe scape the King!
Enter Cornwall, Regan, Goneril, [Edmund the] Bastard, and Servants.
     this letter. The army of France is landed.- Seek out the traitor
                                  [Exeunt some of the Servants.]
     father are not fit for your beholding. Advise the Duke where you
     are going, to a most festinate preparation. We are bound to the
                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
     How now? Where's the King?
     Who, with some other of the lord's dependants,
     Are gone with him towards Dover, where they boast
     Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
                                        [Exeunt other Servants.]
     Without the form of justice, yet our power
     Who's there? the traitor?
  Glou. By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done
     To pluck me by the beard.
     Will quicken, and accuse thee. I am your host.
  Reg. Be simple-answer'd, for we know the truth.
  Corn. And what confederacy have you with the traitors
     Late footed in the kingdom?
  Reg. To whose hands have you sent the lunatic King?
  Corn. Where hast thou sent the King?
  Glou. I am tied to th' stake, and I must stand the course.
     And quench'd the steeled fires.
     Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
     Thou shouldst have said, 'Good porter, turn the key.'
  Corn. See't shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.
     Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.
  Reg. One side will mock another. Th' other too!
  1. Serv. Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.
     Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature
     Thou call'st on him that hates thee. It was he
     That made the overture of thy treasons to us;
     Who is too good to pity thee.
     Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace.
     And in the end meet the old course of death,
  2. Serv. Let's follow the old Earl, and get the bedlam
     The lamentable change is from the best;
     The worst returns to laughter. Welcome then,
     The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst
     My father, poorly led? World, world, O world!
     But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
     I have been your tenant, and your father's tenant,
  Glou. Away, get thee away! Good friend, be gone.
     Thee they may hurt.
  Glou. I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
     The food of thy abused father's wrath!
     Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
  Old Man. How now? Who's there?
  Edg. [aside] O gods! Who is't can say 'I am at the worst'?
     So long as we can say 'This is the worst.'
     Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
     Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard more since.
     They kill us for their sport.
     Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
     Ang'ring itself and others.- Bless thee, master!
  Glou. Is that the naked fellow?
  Glou. Then prithee get thee gone. If for my sake
  Glou. 'Tis the time's plague when madmen lead the blind.
     Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure.
     Above the rest, be gone.
  Old Man. I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have,
  Edg. Poor Tom's acold. [Aside] I cannot daub it further.
  Glou. Come hither, fellow.
  Edg. [aside] And yet I must.- Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
  Glou. Know'st thou the way to Dover?
     scar'd out of his good wits. Bless thee, good man's son, from
     the foul fiend! Five fiends have been in poor Tom at once: of
     bless thee, master!
  Glou. Here, take this Purse, thou whom the heavens' plagues
     Makes thee the happier. Heavens, deal so still!
     Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,
     Looks fearfully in the confined deep.
     Bring me but to the very brim of it,
     And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
     Poor Tom shall lead thee.
Before the Duke of Albany's Palace.
Enter Goneril and [Edmund the] Bastard.
     Not met us on the way.
                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
     I told him of the army that was landed:
     And of the loyal service of his son
     When I inform'd him, then he call'd me sot
     And told me I had turn'd the wrong side out.
  Gon. [to Edmund] Then shall you go no further.
     It is the cowish terror of his spirit,
     Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
     May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother.
     I must change arms at home and give the distaff
     Would stretch thy spirits up into the air.
     Conceive, and fare thee well.
  Edm. Yours in the ranks of death!                        Exit.
     O, the difference of man and man!
     To thee a woman's services are due;
  Gon. I have been worth the whistle.
     You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
     From her material sap, perforce must wither
  Alb. Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile;
     Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?
     A father, and a gracious aged man,
     Whose reverence even the head-lugg'd bear would lick,
     Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
     If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
     Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,
     Like monsters of the deep.
     Ere they have done their mischief. Where's thy drum?
     Proper deformity seems not in the fiend
     To let these hands obey my blood,
     A woman's shape doth shield thee.
  Gent. O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall 's dead,
     The other eye of Gloucester.
     Oppos'd against the act, bending his sword
     To his great master; who, thereat enrag'd,
     Flew on him, and amongst them fell'd him dead;
     You justicers, that these our nether crimes
     Lose he his other eye?
     May all the building in my fancy pluck
     Upon my hateful life. Another way
  Alb. Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
  Gent. Come with my lady hither.
  Alb. Knows he the wickedness?
     And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
     Might have the freer course.
     To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the King,
     And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend.
  Kent. Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back know you the
  Gent. Something he left imperfect in the state, which since his
     coming forth is thought of, which imports to the kingdom so much
  Kent. Did your letters pierce the Queen to any demonstration of
  Gent. Ay, sir. She took them, read them in my presence,
     And now and then an ample tear trill'd down
  Kent. O, then it mov'd her?
     What guests were in her eyes, which parted thence
  Gent. Faith, once or twice she heav'd the name of father
     Kent! father! sisters! What, i' th' storm? i' th' night?
  Kent. It is the stars,
  Kent. Was this before the King return'd?
  Kent. Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' th' town;
     To his dog-hearted daughters- these things sting
  Gent. 'Tis so; they are afoot.
     As mad as the vex'd sea, singing aloud,
     Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
     Search every acre in the high-grown field
     In the restoring his bereaved sense?
     Will close the eye of anguish.
     All you unpublish'd virtues of the earth,
     In the good man's distress! Seek, seek for him!
     Lest his ungovern'd rage dissolve the life
     That wants the means to lead it.
     The British pow'rs are marching hitherward.
     In expectation of them. O dear father,
     But love, dear love, and our ag'd father's right.
Enter Regan and [Oswald the] Steward.
  Reg. But are my brother's pow'rs set forth?
  Reg. Himself in person there?
     Your sister is the better soldier.
     Something- I know not what- I'll love thee much-
     Let me unseal the letter.
  Osw. Madam, I had rather-
     Than for your lady's. You may gather more.
  Reg. Fare thee well.                                   Exeunt.
  Glou. Methinks the ground is even.
     Hark, do you hear the sea?
  Edg. Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect
  Edg. Come on, sir; here's the place. Stand still. How fearful
     The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
     Hangs one that gathers sampire- dreadful trade!
     The fishermen that walk upon the beach
     Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
     Of th' extreme verge. For all beneath the moon
     Here, friend, is another purse; in it a jewel
     Prosper it with thee! Go thou further off;
     Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
     My snuff and loathed part of nature should
     Now, fellow, fare thee well.
     Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought,
  Edg. Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,
     Thou'dst shiver'd like an egg; but thou dost breathe;
     Ten masts at each make not the altitude
  Edg. From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.
     When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage
     Upon the crown o' th' cliff what thing was that
     Horns whelk'd and wav'd like the enridged sea.
     It was some fiend. Therefore, thou happy father,
     Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours
     Of men's impossibility, have preserv'd thee.
     'The fiend, the fiend'- he led me to that place.
  Lear. No, they cannot touch me for coming;
     I am the King himself.
     on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well flown, bird! i'
     th' clout, i' th' clout! Hewgh! Give the word.
     and told me I had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones
     were there. To say 'ay' and 'no' to everything I said! 'Ay' and
     'no' too was no good divinity. When the rain came to wet me
     once, and the wind to make me chatter; when the thunder would
     not peace at my bidding; there I found 'em, there I smelt 'em
     out. Go to, they are not men o' their words! They told me I was
     Is't not the King?
     When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
     The wren goes to't, and the small gilded fly
     Was kinder to his father than my daughters
     Got 'tween the lawful sheets.
     That minces virtue, and does shake the head
     The fitchew nor the soiled horse goes to't
     Down from the waist they are Centaurs,
     But to the girdle do the gods inherit,
     Beneath is all the fiend's.
     There's hell, there's darkness, there's the sulphurous pit;
     Give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, to sweeten my
     imagination. There's money for thee.
     challenge; mark but the penning of it.
  Glou. Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.
  Glou. What, with the case of eyes?
  Lear. O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your head, nor no
  Lear. What, art mad? A man may see how the world goes with no eyes.
     which is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen a
  Lear. And the creature run from the cur? There thou mightst behold
     the great image of authority: a dog's obeyed in office.
     For which thou whip'st her. The usurer hangs the cozener.
     Through tatter'd clothes small vices do appear;
     And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks;
     Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
     To seal th' accuser's lips. Get thee glass eyes
     To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now!
     I know thee well enough; thy name is Gloucester.
     Thou must be patient. We came crying hither;
     Thou know'st, the first time that we smell the air
     We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee. Mark.
  Glou. Alack, alack the day!
     And when I have stol'n upon these sons-in-law,
  Lear. Then there's life in't. Nay, an you get it, you shall get it
  Gent. A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
     Who redeems nature from the general curse
     How near's the other army?
     Stands on the hourly thought.
  Gent. Though that the Queen on special cause is here,
  Edg. Well pray you, father.
     Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
     The bounty and the benison of heaven
                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
     That must destroy thee.
     Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
  Edg. Chill not let go, zir, without vurther 'cagion.
     che vore ye, or Ise try whether your costard or my ballow be the
     And give the letters which thou find'st about me
     Upon the British party. O, untimely death! Death!
  Edg. I know thee well. A serviceable villain,
     As duteous to the vices of thy mistress
  Edg. Sit you down, father; rest you.
     Let's see his pockets; these letters that he speaks of
     He had no other deathsman. Let us see.
     To know our enemies' minds, we'ld rip their hearts;
     Their papers, is more lawful.             Reads the letter.
     return the conqueror. Then am I the prisoner, and his bed my
     jail; from the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the
     And the exchange my brother! Here in the sands
     Thee I'll rake up, the post unsanctified
     Of murtherous lechers; and in the mature time
     With this ungracious paper strike the sight
     Of the death-practis'd Duke, For him 'tis well
     The knowledge of themselves.
     Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.
     Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend.        Exeunt.
A tent in the French camp.
     All my reports go with the modest truth;
     I prithee put them off.
  Cor. Then be't so, my good lord. [To the Doctor] How, does the King?
     Of this child-changed father!
     That we may wake the King? He hath slept long.
  Gent. Ay, madam. In the heaviness of sleep
  Doct. Please you draw near. Louder the music there!
  Cor. O my dear father, restoration hang
  Cor. Had you not been their father, these white flakes
     Had challeng'd pity of them. Was this a face
     To be oppos'd against the warring winds?
     To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
     In the most terrible and nimble stroke
     Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,
     To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn,
     To see another thus. I know not what to say.
     I will not swear these are my hands. Let's see.
     What place this is; and all the skill I have
     Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
     You have some cause, they have not.
     To make him even o'er the time he has lost.
     Till further settling.
  Gent. Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?
  Kent. As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.
  Gent. They say Edgar, his banish'd son, is with the Earl of Kent
  Kent. Report is changeable. 'Tis time to look about; the powers of
     the kingdom approach apace.
  Edm. Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
     Or whether since he is advis'd by aught
     To change the course. He's full of alteration
     You know the goodness I intend upon you.
     Tell me- but truly- but then speak the truth-
  Reg. But have you never found my brother's way
     To the forfended place?
     She and the Duke her husband!
  Gon. [aside] I had rather lose the battle than that sister
     Sir, this I hear: the King is come to his daughter,
     With others whom the rigour of our state
     Not bolds the King, with others whom, I fear,
  Gon. Combine together 'gainst the enemy;
     For these domestic and particular broils
     Are not the question here.
  Alb. Let's then determine
  Gon. [aside] O, ho, I know the riddle.- I will go.
          [As they are going out,] enter Edgar [disguised].
  Edg. Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
     If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
     What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
     Your business of the world hath so an end,
  Alb. Stay till I have read the letter.
     When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
  Alb. Why, fare thee well. I will o'erlook thy paper.
     Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
  Alb. We will greet the time.                             Exit.
  Edm. To both these sisters have I sworn my love;
     Each jealous of the other, as the stung
     Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
     Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoy'd,
     If both remain alive. To take the widow
     Her husband being alive. Now then, we'll use
     His countenance for the battle, which being done,
     His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
     The battle done, and they within our power,
A field between the two camps.
Alarum within. Enter, with Drum and Colours, the Powers of France
over the stage, Cordelia with her Father in her hand, and exeunt.
  Edg. Here, father, take the shadow of this tree
     For your good host. Pray that the right may thrive.
  Glou. No further, sir. A man may rot even here.
     Their going hence, even as their coming hither;
  Edm. Some officers take them away. Good guard
     Until their greater pleasures first be known
     That are to censure them.
  Cor. We are not the first
     Who with best meaning have incurr'd the worst.
     For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down;
     Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
     And ask of thee forgiveness. So we'll live,
     Talk of court news; and we'll talk with them too-
     And take upon 's the mystery of things,
  Edm. Take them away.
     The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee?
     Ere they shall make us weep! We'll see 'em starv'd first.
  Edm. Come hither, Captain; hark.
     Take thou this note [gives a paper]. Go follow them to prison.
     One step I have advanc'd thee. If thou dost
     As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
     Are as the time is. To be tender-minded
     Will not bear question. Either say thou'lt do't,
     Or thrive by other means.
     And fortune led you well. You have the captives
     Who were the opposites of this day's strife.
     We do require them of you, so to use them
     As we shall find their merits and our safety
     To send the old and miserable King
     To pluck the common bosom on his side
     Which do command them. With him I sent the Queen,
     My reason all the same; and they are ready
     To-morrow, or at further space, t' appear
     We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;
     And the best quarrels, in the heat, are curs'd
     By those that feel their sharpness.
     The question of Cordelia and her father
     Not as a brother.
     Bore the commission of my place and person,
     And call itself your brother.
     By me invested, he compeers the best.
  Gon. That were the most if he should husband you.
     Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine.
     Witness the world that I create thee here
  Reg. [to Edmund] Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.
  Alb. Stay yet; hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee
     I bar it in the interest of my wife.
  Alb. Thou art arm'd, Gloucester. Let the trumpet sound.
     Than I have here proclaim'd thee.
  Edm. There's my exchange [throws down a glove]. What in the world
     Took their discharge.
     Come hither, herald. Let the trumpet sound,
  Her. (reads) 'If any man of quality or degree within the lists of
     the army will maintain upon Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloucester,
     that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third sound
     of the trumpet. He is bold in his defence.'
    Enter Edgar, armed, at the third sound, a Trumpet before him.
     Yet am I noble as the adversary
     Thy arm may do thee justice. Here is mine.
     Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,
     False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
     To the descent and dust beneath thy foot,
     And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
     With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart;
     Which- for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise-
     This sword of mine shall give them instant way
     Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!
  Gon. Say if I do- the laws are mine, not thine.
     I do forgive thee.
     If more, the more th' hast wrong'd me.
     My name is Edgar and thy father's son.
     The dark and vicious place where thee he got
     A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee.
     Did hate thee, or thy father!
     How have you known the miseries of your father?
  Edg. By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale;
     That with the pain of death would hourly die
     Rather than die at once!) taught me to shift
     Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
     (Alack, too weak the conflict to support!)
  Alb. If there be more, more woful, hold it in;
     To such as love not sorrow; but another,
     Whilst I was big in clamour, came there a man,
     Shunn'd my abhorr'd society; but then, finding
     As he'd burst heaven; threw him on my father;
     Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
     His grief grew puissant, and the strings of life
     Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets sounded,
     And there I left him tranc'd.
  Edg. Kent, sir, the banish'd Kent; who in disguise
     It came even from the heart of- O! she's dead!
  Edm. I was contracted to them both. All three
  Alb. Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead.
     This judgement of the heavens, that makes us tremble
     The time will not allow the compliment
     Speak, Edmund, where's the King? and where's Cordelia?
     The one the other poisoned for my sake,
  Alb. Even so. Cover their faces.
     (Be brief in't) to the castle; for my writ
     Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia.
  Edg. To who, my lord? Who has the office? Send
     Give it the Captain.
  Alb. Haste thee for thy life.                    [Exit Edgar.]
     To hang Cordelia in the prison and
     To lay the blame upon her own despair
                        and others following].
     Had I your tongues and eyes, I'ld use them so
     If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
     Why, then she lives.
  Kent. Is this the promis'd end?
  Lear. This feather stirs; she lives! If it be so,
  Lear. Prithee away!
     I kill'd the slave that was a-hanging thee.
     I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion
     I would have made them skip. I am old now,
     And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?
     One of them we behold.
  Kent. No, my good lord; I am the very man-
  Lear. You're welcome hither.
     Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
     During the life of this old Majesty,
     The wages of their virtue, and all foes
     The cup of their deservings.- O, see, see!
     Look there, look there!                            He dies.
  Kent. Break, heart; I prithee break!
     That would upon the rack of this tough world
  Alb. Bear them from hence. Our present business
     Rule in this realm, and the gor'd state sustain.
  BEROWNE,    lord attending on the King
  BOYET,   lord attending on the Princess of France
  ROSALINE, lady attending on the Princess
  KATHARINE, lady attending on the Princess
Enter the King, BEROWNE, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN
  KING. Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
    And then grace us in the disgrace of death;
    That honour which shall bate his scythe's keen edge,
    And the huge army of the world's desires-
    Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
    That violates the smallest branch herein.
    The mind shall banquet, though the body pine.
    Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.
    The grosser manner of these world's delights
    He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves;
    With all these living in philosophy.
  BEROWNE. I can but say their protestation over;
    But there are other strict observances,
    Which I hope well is not enrolled there;
    The which I hope is not enrolled there;
    And then to sleep but three hours in the night
    And not be seen to wink of all the day-
    And make a dark night too of half the day-
    Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
    O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
  KING. Your oath is pass'd to pass away from these.
  LONGAVILLE. You swore to that, Berowne, and to the rest.
  BEROWNE. By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.
    What is the end of study, let me know.
  BEROWNE. Come on, then; I will swear to study so,
    To know the thing I am forbid to know,
  KING. These be the stops that hinder study quite,
    To seek the light of truth; while truth the while
    Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look.
    Study me how to please the eye indeed,
    Study is like the heaven's glorious sun,
    Save base authority from others' books.
    These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights
    Have no more profit of their shining nights
    Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
    And every godfather can give a name.
  LONGAVILLE. He weeds the corn, and still lets grow the weeding.
  BEROWNE. Something then in rhyme.
    That bites the first-born infants of the spring.
    Before the birds have any cause to sing?
    Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.
    And bide the penance of each three years' day.
    Give me the paper; let me read the same;
    And to the strictest decrees I'll write my name.
  KING. How well this yielding rescues thee from shame!
  BEROWNE. Let's see the penalty. [Reads] '-on pain of losing her
  LONGAVILLE. To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
    the term of three years, he shall endure such public shame as the
    rest of the court can possibly devise.'
    To her decrepit, sick, and bedrid father;
    Or vainly comes th' admired princess hither.
    It doth forget to do the thing it should;
    And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
    So to the laws at large I write my name;        [Subscribes]
    And he that breaks them in the least degree
    Suggestions are to other as to me;
    I am the last that will last keep his oath.
    But is there no quick recreation granted?
  KING. Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted
    A man in all the world's new fashion planted,
    One who the music of his own vain tongue
    Have chose as umpire of their mutiny.
    In high-born words, the worth of many a knight
    From tawny Spain lost in the world's debate.
  LONGAVILLE. Costard the swain and he shall be our sport;
  DULL. Which is the Duke's own person?
  COSTARD. Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
  KING. A letter from the magnificent Armado.
  BEROWNE. How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.
  BEROWNE. Well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to climb
    in the merriness.
    The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.
    seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with her upon the form,
    and taken following her into the park; which, put together, is in
    manner and form following. Now, sir, for the manner- it is the
    manner of a man to speak to a woman. For the form- in some form.
  BEROWNE. For the following, sir?
  COSTARD. As it shall follow in my correction; and God defend the
  COSTARD. Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
  KING. [Reads] 'Great deputy, the welkin's vicegerent and sole
  COSTARD. Of other men's secrets, I beseech you.
    did commend the black oppressing humour to the most wholesome
    myself to walk. The time When? About the sixth hour; when beasts
    which is called supper. So much for the time When. Now for the
    for the place Where? where, I mean, I did encounter that obscene
    the ebon-coloured ink which here thou viewest, beholdest,
    surveyest, or seest. But to the place Where? It standeth
    north-north-east and by east from the west corner of thy
    King. 'with a child of our grandmother Eve, a female; or, for thy
    duty pricks me on, have sent to thee, to receive the meed of
  KING. 'For Jaquenetta- so is the weaker vessel called, which I
    apprehended with the aforesaid swain- I keep her as a vessel of
    thy law's fury; and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice,
  BEROWNE. This is not so well as I look'd for, but the best that
  KING. Ay, the best for the worst. But, sirrah, what say you to
  COSTARD. Sir, I confess the wench.
  KING. Did you hear the proclamation?
  COSTARD. I do confess much of the hearing it, but little of the
  COSTARD. This was no damsel neither, sir; she was a virgin.
  COSTARD. I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
    Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
  COSTARD. I suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is I was taken
    with Jaquenetta, and Jaquenetta is a true girl; and therefore
    welcome the sour cup of prosperity! Affliction may one day smile
    again; and till then, sit thee down, sorrow.
  ARMADO. Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.
  MOTH. By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough signior.
  ARMADO. I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton
  ARMADO. And therefore apt, because quick.
  MOTH. I will praise an eel with the same praise.
  MOTH. [Aside] He speaks the mere contrary: crosses love not him.
  ARMADO. I have promised to study three years with the Duke.
  ARMADO. I am ill at reck'ning; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster.
  ARMADO. I confess both; they are both the varnish of a complete
  MOTH. Then I am sure you know how much the gross sum of deuce-ace
  MOTH. Which the base vulgar do call three.
    to the word 'three,' and study three years in two words, the
    my sword against the humour of affection would deliver me from
    the reprobate thought of it, I would take Desire prisoner, and
    and, sweet my child, let them be men of good repute and carriage.
    carriage, for he carried the town gates on his back like a
  ARMADO. O well-knit Samson! strong-jointed Samson! I do excel thee
  MOTH. Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the
  MOTH. Of the sea-water green, sir.
  ARMADO. Is that one of the four complexions?
  MOTH. As I have read, sir; and the best of them too.
  ARMADO. Green, indeed, is the colour of lovers; but to have a love
  MOTH. My father's wit my mother's tongue assist me!
  ARMADO. Sweet invocation of a child; most pretty, and pathetical!
             For still her cheeks possess the same
    A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of white and red.
  ARMADO. Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?
    would neither serve for the writing nor the tune.
    that country girl that I took in the park with the rational hind
  DULL. Sir, the Duke's pleasure is that you keep Costard safe; and
    the park; she is allow'd for the day-woman. Fare you well.
  ARMADO. I will visit thee at the lodge.
  ARMADO. I will tell thee wonders.
  ARMADO. I love thee.
  JAQUENETTA. Fair weather after you!
  COSTARD. I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they are but
  COSTARD. Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation that I
  COSTARD. Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon. It is
    not for prisoners to be too silent in their words, and therefore
    another man, and therefore I can be quiet.
  ARMADO. I do affect the very ground, which is base, where her shoe,
    Cupid's butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules' club, and therefore
    will not serve my turn; the passado he respects not, the duello
Enter the PRINCESS OF FRANCE, with three attending ladies,
ROSALINE, MARIA, KATHARINE, BOYET, and two other LORDS
    Consider who the King your father sends,
    Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
    To parley with the sole inheritor
    Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight
    When she did starve the general world beside
    And prodigally gave them all to you.
    Needs not the painted flourish of your praise.
    Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye,
    In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
    But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
    Tell him the daughter of the King of France,
    Who are the votaries, my loving lords,
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Know you the man?
    Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Such short-liv'd wits do wither as they grow.
    Who are the rest?
    I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once;
  ROSALINE. Another of these students at that time
    Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
    Berowne they call him; but a merrier man,
    Within the limit of becoming mirth,
    For every object that the one doth catch
    The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. God bless my ladies! Are they all in love,
    He rather means to lodge you in the field,
  KING. Fair Princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.
    welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I will be welcome then; conduct me thither.
  KING. Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
    Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. YOU Will the sooner that I were away,
  KATHARINE. How needless was it then to ask the question!
  KATHARINE. Not till it leave the rider in the mire.
  KATHARINE. Fair fall the face it covers!
  BEROWNE. Nay, then will I be gone.
  KING. Madam, your father here doth intimate
    Being but the one half of an entire sum
    Disbursed by my father in his wars.
    But say that he or we, as neither have,
    Receiv'd that sum, yet there remains unpaid
    A hundred thousand more, in surety of the which,
    Although not valued to the money's worth.
    If then the King your father will restore
    Which we much rather had depart withal,
    And have the money by our father lent,
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. You do the King my father too much wrong,
    And wrong the reputation of your name,
    Of Charles his father.
  BOYET. So please your Grace, the packet is not come,
    Where that and other specialties are bound;
    To-morrow you shall have a sight of them.
  KING. Thy own wish wish I thee in every place.
  ROSALINE. Is the fool sick?
  BEROWNE. Sick at the heart.
  LONGAVILLE. I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
  BOYET. A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.
  LONGAVILLE. Perchance light in the light. I desire her name.
  BOYET. Her mother's, I have heard.
  BEROWNE. What's her name in the cap?
  MARIA. That last is Berowne, the merry mad-cap lord;
  KATHARINE. You sheep and I pasture- shall that finish the jest?
    My lips are no common, though several they be.
    By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
  BOYET. Why, all his behaviours did make their retire
    To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.
    All senses to that sense did make their repair,
    Who, tend'ring their own worth from where they were glass'd,
    Did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd.
  KATHARINE. He is Cupid's grandfather, and learns news of him.
  ROSALINE. Then was Venus like her mother; for her father is but
  BOYET. What, then; do you see?
    enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately hither; I must
  MOTH. No, my complete master; but to jig off a tune at the tongue's
    eyelids, sigh a note and sing a note, sometime through the
    through the nose, as if you snuff'd up love by smelling love,
    with your hat penthouse-like o'er the shop of your eyes, with
    spit, or your hands in your pocket, like a man after the old
    These are complements, these are humours; these betray nice
    wenches, that would be betrayed without these; and make them men
    of note- do you note me?- that most are affected to these.
  MOTH. No, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your love
  MOTH. A man, if I live; and this, by, in, and without, upon the
  ARMADO. I am all these three.
  ARMADO. Fetch hither the swain; he must carry me a letter.
  MOTH. Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse, for he is
  MOTH. Minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.
    He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that's he;
    I shoot thee at the swain.
  MOTH. Thump, then, and I flee.                            Exit
    Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.
  COSTARD. No egma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the mail, sir.
    spleen; the heaving of my lungs provokes me to ridiculous
    smiling. O, pardon me, my stars! Doth the inconsiderate take
    salve for l'envoy, and the word 'l'envoy' for a salve?
  MOTH. Do the wise think them other? Is not l'envoy a salve?
           The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
    There's the moral. Now the l'envoy.
  MOTH. I will add the l'envoy. Say the moral again.
  ARMADO.  The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
  MOTH.    Until the goose came out of door,
           And stay'd the odds by adding four.
           The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
  ARMADO.  Until the goose came out of door,
           Staying the odds by adding four.
  MOTH. A good l'envoy, ending in the goose; would you desire more?
  ARMADO. Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?
    Then call'd you for the l'envoy.
    Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought;
    And he ended the market.
  ARMADO. But tell me: how was there a costard broken in a shin?
    Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
  COSTARD. Till there be more matter in the shin.
  ARMADO. Sirrah Costard. I will enfranchise thee.
  ARMADO. By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,
  ARMADO. I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and, in
    lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this: bear this
    significant [giving a letter] to the country maid Jaquenetta;
    there is remuneration, for the best ward of mine honour is
  MOTH. Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.
    Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration! O, that's the
    'What's the price of this inkle?'- 'One penny.'- 'No, I'll give
  BEROWNE. Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.
  BEROWNE. Stay, slave; I must employ thee.
    The Princess comes to hunt here in the park,
    And in her train there is a gentle lady;
    When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
    And Rosaline they call her. Ask for her,
    A domineering pedant o'er the boy,
    And, among three, to love the worst of all,
    Ay, and, by heaven, one that will do the deed,
Enter the PRINCESS, ROSALINE, MARIA, KATHARINE, BOYET, LORDS, ATTENDANTS,
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Was that the King that spurr'd his horse so
    Against the steep uprising of the hill?
    Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
    That we must stand and play the murderer in?
  FORESTER. Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice;
    A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
    And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.
    Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
    O heresy in fair, fit for these days!
    But come, the bow. Now mercy goes to kill,
    And shooting well is then accounted ill;
    Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
    If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
    We bend to that the working of the heart;
    Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
    Lords o'er their lords?
  BOYET. Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
  COSTARD. God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that
  COSTARD. Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. The thickest and the tallest.
  COSTARD. The thickest and the tallest! It is so; truth is truth.
    One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.
    Are not you the chief woman? You are the thickest here.
    Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
    magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua set eye upon the
    the vulgar,- O base and obscure vulgar!- videlicet, He came, saw,
    the king. Why did he come?- to see. Why did he see?-to overcome.
    To whom came he?- to the beggar. What saw he?- the beggar. Who
    overcame he?- the beggar. The conclusion is victory; on whose
    side?- the king's. The captive is enrich'd; on whose side?- the
    beggar's. The catastrophe is a nuptial; on whose side?- the
    king's. No, on both in one, or one in both. I am the king, for so
    stands the comparison; thou the beggar, for so witnesseth thy
                  Thine in the dearest design of industry,
    'Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
    'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey;
    But if thou strive, poor soul, what are thou then?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. What plume of feathers is he that indited this
    What vane? What weathercock? Did you ever hear better?
  BOYET. I am much deceived but I remember the style.
    To the Prince and his book-mates.
    Who gave thee this letter?
    [To ROSALINE] Here, sweet, put up this; 'twill be thine another
  BOYET. Who is the shooter? who is the shooter?
  ROSALINE. Why, she that bears the bow.
    Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
  ROSALINE. Well then, I am the shooter.
  ROSALINE. If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
  MARIA. You Still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes at the
  ROSALINE. Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was a man
    when King Pepin of France was a little boy, as touching the hit
  BOYET. So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a woman when
    Queen Guinever of Britain was a little wench, as touching the hit
            An I cannot, another can.
  MARIA. A mark marvellous well shot; for they both did hit it.
    Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
  MARIA. Wide o' the bow-hand! I' faith, your hand is out.
  COSTARD. Indeed, 'a must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the
  BOYET. An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
  COSTARD. Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.
    Lord, Lord! how the ladies and I have put him down!
    And his page a t' other side, that handful of wit!
    Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit!
From the shooting within, enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL
  NATHANIEL. Very reverent sport, truly; and done in the testimony of
    the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of caelo,
    the sky, the welkin, the heaven; and anon falleth like a crab on
    the face of terra, the soil, the land, the earth.
  NATHANIEL. Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly
    varied, like a scholar at the least; but, sir, I assure ye it was
    a buck of the first head.
    replication, or rather, ostentare, to show, as it were, his
    unpruned, untrained, or rather unlettered, or ratherest
  DULL. I Said the deer was not a haud credo; 'twas a pricket.
  NATHANIEL. Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred in
    in the duller parts;
    So, were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school.
    But, omne bene, say I, being of an old father's mind:
    Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
  NATHANIEL. A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.
    Th' allusion holds in the exchange.
  DULL. 'Tis true, indeed; the collusion holds in the exchange.
    the exchange.
  DULL. And I say the polusion holds in the exchange; for the moon is
    that the Princess kill'd.
    the death of the deer? And, to humour the ignorant, call the deer
    the Princess kill'd a pricket.
  HOLOFERNES. I Will something affect the letter, for it argues
    The dogs did yell; put el to sore, then sorel jumps from thicket-
    Or pricket sore, or else sorel; the people fall a-hooting.
    If sore be sore, then L to sore makes fifty sores o' sorel.
    the ventricle of memory, nourish'd in the womb of pia mater, and
    delivered upon the mellowing of occasion. But the gift is good in
  NATHANIEL. Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my
    parishioners; for their sons are well tutor'd by you, and their
    the commonwealth.
  HOLOFERNES. Mehercle, if their sons be ingenious, they shall want
    no instruction; if their daughters be capable, I will put it to
    them; but, vir sapit qui pauca loquitur. A soul feminine saluteth
    pierc'd which is the one?
    and so forth. Ah, good old Mantuan! I may speak of thee as
    the traveller doth of Venice:
    Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! Who understandeth thee not,
    loves thee not-
    Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? or rather as
    Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll faithful prove;
    Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like osiers bowed.
    If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice;
    Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend;
    All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;
  HOLOFERNES. You find not the apostrophas, and so miss the accent:
    let me supervise the canzonet. Here are only numbers ratified;
    but, for the elegancy, facility, and golden cadence of poesy,
    caret. Ovidius Naso was the man. And why, indeed, 'Naso' but for
    smelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy, the jerks of
    invention? Imitari is nothing: so doth the hound his master, the
    ape his keeper, the tired horse his rider. But, damosella virgin,
  JAQUENETTA. Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Berowne, one of the strange
  HOLOFERNES. I will overglance the superscript: 'To the snow-white
    hand of the most beauteous Lady Rosaline.' I will look again on
    the intellect of the letter, for the nomination of the party
    writing to the person written unto: 'Your Ladyship's in all
    of the votaries with the King; and here he hath framed a letter
    to a sequent of the stranger queen's which accidentally, or by
    the way of progression, hath miscarried. Trip and go, my sweet;
    deliver this paper into the royal hand of the King; it may
  COSTARD. Have with thee, my girl.
  NATHANIEL. Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very
    religiously; and, as a certain father saith-
  HOLOFERNES. Sir, tell not me of the father; I do fear colourable
    colours. But to return to the verses: did they please you, Sir
  NATHANIEL. Marvellous well for the pen.
  HOLOFERNES. I do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil of
    the table with a grace, I will, on my privilege I have with the
    parents of the foresaid child or pupil, undertake your ben
    neither savouring of poetry, wit, nor invention. I beseech your
  NATHANIEL. And thank you too; for society, saith the text, is the
  HOLOFERNES. And certes, the text most infallibly concludes it.
    pauca verba. Away; the gentles are at their game, and we will to
  BEROWNE. The King he is hunting the deer: I am coursing myself.
    defiles. Defile! a foul word. Well, 'set thee down, sorrow!' for
    so they say the fool said, and so say I, and I am the fool. Well
    proved, wit. By the Lord, this love is as mad as Ajax: it kills
    for her two eyes. Well, I do nothing in the world but lie, and
    here my melancholy. Well, she hath one o' my sonnets already; the
    clown bore it, the fool sent it, and the lady hath it: sweet
    clown, sweeter fool, sweetest lady! By the world, I would not
    care a pin if the other three were in. Here comes one with a
                      Enter the KING, with a paper
    him with thy bird-bolt under the left pap. In faith, secrets!
      'So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
      To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
      As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
      Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
      Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
      No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
      Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
      And they thy glory through my grief will show.
      But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep
    How shall she know my griefs? I'll drop the paper-
  BEROWNE. One drunkard loves another of the name.
  LONGAVILLE. Am I the first that have been perjur'd so?
  BEROWNE. I could put thee in comfort: not by two that I know;
    Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,
  LONGAVILLE. I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move.
  LONGAVILLE. This same shall go.          [He reads the sonnet]
      'Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
      'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument,
      Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
      Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee:
      Exhal'st this vapour-vow; in thee it is.
      If broken, then it is no fault of mine;
  BEROWNE. This is the liver-vein, which makes flesh a deity,
    Like a demigod here sit I in the sky,
    More sacks to the mill! O heavens, I have my wish!
  DUMAIN. By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
  BEROWNE. By earth, she is not, corporal: there you lie.
  DUMAIN. As upright as the cedar.
  BEROWNE. Ay, as some days; but then no sun must shine.
  BEROWNE. A fever in your blood? Why, then incision
  DUMAIN. Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.
        'On a day-alack the day!-
        Playing in the wanton air.
        Through the velvet leaves the wind,
        That the lover, sick to death,
        Wish'd himself the heaven's breath.
        Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn;
        That I am forsworn for thee;
    O, would the King, Berowne and Longaville,
    Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
    'Ay me!' says one. 'O Jove!' the other cries.
    One, her hairs were gold; crystal the other's eyes.
    For all the wealth that ever I did see,
    Ah, good my liege, I pray thee pardon me.
    You found his mote; the King your mote did see;
    And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
    And where my liege's? All about the breast.
    To break the vow I am engaged in;
  KING. Soft! whither away so fast?
  JAQUENETTA. God bless the King!
  KING. What present hast thou there?
  KING. If it mar nothing neither,
    The treason and you go in peace away together.
  KING. Berowne, read it over.        [BEROWNE reads the letter]
                                      [BEROWNE tears the letter]
  LONGAVILLE. It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear
                                       [Gathering up the pieces]
  BEROWNE. That you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess;
    DUMAIN. Now the number is even.
    Will these turtles be gone?
  COSTARD. Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
    We cannot cross the cause why we were born,
  KING. What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
  BEROWNE. 'Did they?' quoth you. Who sees the heavenly Rosaline
    At the first op'ning of the gorgeous east,
    Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
    Dares look upon the heaven of her brow
  KING. What zeal, what fury hath inspir'd thee now?
  BEROWNE. My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne.
    Of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty
    Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues-
    She passes praise; then praise too short doth blot.
    A wither'd hermit, five-score winters worn,
    And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy.
    O, 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine!
  KING. O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,
    The hue of dungeons, and the school of night;
    And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.
    And therefore is she born to make black fair.
    Her favour turns the fashion of the days;
    And therefore red that would avoid dispraise
  KING. And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.
    For fear their colours should be wash'd away.
  KING. No devil will fright thee then so much as she.
  BEROWNE. O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
  BEROWNE. Nothing so sure; and thereby all forsworn.
  DUMAIN. Ay, marry, there; some flattery for this evil.
    Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil!
    Have at you, then, affection's men-at-arms.
    Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth.
    Can you still dream, and pore, and thereon look?
    Have found the ground of study's excellence
    Without the beauty of a woman's face?
    They are the ground, the books, the academes,
    From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire.
    The nimble spirits in the arteries,
    The sinewy vigour of the traveller.
    You have in that forsworn the use of eyes,
    And study too, the causer of your vow;
    For where is author in the world
    Do we not likewise see our learning there?
    Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
    Other slow arts entirely keep the brain;
    And therefore, finding barren practisers,
    Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil;
    Lives not alone immured in the brain,
    But with the motion of all elements
    Above their functions and their offices.
    It adds a precious seeing to the eye:
    A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound,
    When the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd.
    Than are the tender horns of cockled snails:
    Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
    And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
    Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.
    O, then his lines would ravish savage ears,
    They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;
    They are the books, the arts, the academes,
    That show, contain, and nourish, all the world,
    Then fools you were these women to forswear;
    Or for men's sake, the authors of these women;
    For charity itself fulfils the law,
  KING. Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
  BEROWNE. Advance your standards, and upon them, lords;
    Pell-mell, down with them! be first advis'd,
    In conflict, that you get the sun of them.
  LONGAVILLE. Now to plain-dealing; lay these glozes by.
    Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?
  KING. And win them too; therefore let us devise
    Some entertainment for them in their tents.
  BEROWNE. First, from the park let us conduct them thither;
    Then homeward every man attach the hand
    Of his fair mistress. In the afternoon
    We will with some strange pastime solace them,
    Such as the shortness of the time can shape;
    day with a companion of the King's who is intituled, nominated,
  NATHANIEL. A most singular and choice epithet.
  HOLOFERNES. He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than
    the staple of his argument. I abhor such fanatical phantasimes,
    languages and stol'n the scraps.
  COSTARD. O, they have liv'd long on the alms-basket of words. I
    marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou are
    not so long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus; thou art
  MOTH. Peace! the peal begins.
  MOTH. Yes, yes; he teaches boys the hornbook. What is a, b, spelt
    backward with the horn on his head?
  MOTH. The third of the five vowels, if You repeat them; or the
  HOLOFERNES. I will repeat them: a, e, I-
  MOTH. The sheep; the other two concludes it: o, U.
  ARMADO. Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet touch,
  HOLOFERNES. What is the figure? What is the figure?
  COSTARD. An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst have it
    to buy ginger-bread. Hold, there is the very remuneration I had
    discretion. O, an the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but
    my bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me! Go to;
    thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers' ends, as they say.
  ARMADO. Arts-man, preambulate; we will be singuled from the
    barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the charge-house on the
    top of the mountain?
  HOLOFERNES. Or mons, the hill.
  ARMADO. At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.
  ARMADO. Sir, it is the King's most sweet pleasure and affection to
    congratulate the Princess at her pavilion, in the posteriors of
    this day; which the rude multitude call the afternoon.
  HOLOFERNES. The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is liable,
    congruent, and measurable, for the afternoon. The word is well
  ARMADO. Sir, the King is a noble gentleman, and my familiar, I do
    it pass. I do beseech thee, remember thy courtesy. I beseech
    thee, apparel thy head. And among other importunate and most
    pass; for I must tell thee it will please his Grace, by the
    sweet heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no fable:
    to Armado, a soldier, a man of travel, that hath seen the world;
    implore secrecy- that the King would have me present the
    or pageant, or antic, or firework. Now, understanding that the
    to the end to crave your assistance.
  HOLOFERNES. Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies.
    show in the posterior of this day, to be rend'red by our
    assistance, the King's command, and this most gallant,
    illustrate, and learned gentleman, before the Princess- I say
    none so fit as to present the Nine Worthies.
  NATHANIEL. Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?
    limb or joint, shall pass Pompey the Great; the page, Hercules.
    Worthy's thumb; he is not so big as the end of his club.
  MOTH. An excellent device! So, if any of the audience hiss, you may
    cry 'Well done, Hercules; now thou crushest the snake!' That is
    the way to make an offence gracious, though few have the grace to
  ARMADO. For the rest of the Worthies?
  DULL. Nor understood none neither, sir.
  HOLOFERNES. Allons! we will employ thee.
    On the tabor to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay.
Enter the PRINCESS, MARIA, KATHARINE, and ROSALINE
    Look you what I have from the loving King.
    Writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
  ROSALINE. That was the way to make his godhead wax;
  KATHARINE. You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
    Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
  ROSALINE. Indeed, I weigh not you; and therefore light.
    The numbers true, and, were the numb'ring too,
    I were the fairest goddess on the ground.
  ROSALINE. Much in the letters; nothing in the praise.
  MARIA. This, and these pearl, to me sent Longaville;
    The chain were longer and the letter short?
  MARIA. Ay, or I would these hands might never part.
    And wait the season, and observe the times,
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. None are so surely caught, when they are
    Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school,
    As fool'ry in the wise when wit doth dote,
    Since all the power thereof it doth apply
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Saint Dennis to Saint Cupid! What are they
    That charge their breath against us? Say, scout, say.
  BOYET. Under the cool shade of a sycamore
    That, by and by, disguis'd they will be here.
    Action and accent did they teach him there:
    And ever and anon they made a doubt
    'For' quoth the King 'an angel shalt thou see;
    With that all laugh'd, and clapp'd him on the shoulder,
    Making the bold wag by their praises bolder.
    Another with his finger and his thumb
    The fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell.
    With that they all did tumble on the ground,
    To check their folly, passion's solemn tears.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. But what, but what, come they to visit us?
  BOYET. They do, they do, and are apparell'd thus,
    Unto his several mistress; which they'll know
    By favours several which they did bestow.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. And will they so? The gallants shall be task'd,
    And not a man of them shall have the grace,
    And then the King will court thee for his dear;
    Woo contrary, deceiv'd by these removes.
  ROSALINE. Come on, then, wear the favours most in sight.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. The effect of my intent is to cross theirs.
    Their several counsels they unbosom shall
    Upon the next occasion that we meet
  ROSALINE. But shall we dance, if they desire us to't?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. No, to the death, we will not move a foot,
    Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace;
  BOYET. Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
    To make theirs ours, and ours none but our own;
    And they well mock'd depart away with shame.
  BOYET. The trumpet sounds; be mask'd; the maskers come.
          Enter BLACKAMOORS music, MOTH as Prologue, the
     KING and his LORDS as maskers, in the guise of Russians
  MOTH. All hail, the richest heauties on the earth!
  MOTH. A holy parcel of the fairest dames
                            [The LADIES turn their backs to him]
    That ever turn'd their- backs- to mortal views!
  BEROWNE. Their eyes, villain, their eyes.
  MOTH. That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!
  BOYET. They will not answer to that epithet;
  ROSALINE. What would these strangers? Know their minds, Boyet.
    If they do speak our language, 'tis our will
    That some plain man recount their purposes.
    Know what they would.
  BOYET. What would you with the Princess?
  ROSALINE. What would they, say they?
  ROSALINE. Why, that they have; and bid them so be gone.
  BOYET. They say that they have measur'd many a mile
  ROSALINE. It is not so. Ask them how many inches
    Is in one mile? If they have measured many,
    The measure, then, of one is eas'ly told.
  BOYET. If to come hither you have measur'd miles,
    And many miles, the Princess bids you tell
  BEROWNE. Tell her we measure them by weary steps.
    Are numb'red in the travel of one mile?
    Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
    Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,
    Thou now requests but moonshine in the water.
  ROSALINE. Play, music, then. Nay, you must do it soon.
    Not yet? No dance! Thus change I like the moon.
  ROSALINE. You took the moon at full; but now she's changed.
  KING. Yet still she is the Moon, and I the Man.
  KING. Why take we hands then?
    Curtsy, sweet hearts; and so the measure ends.
  ROSALINE. In private then.
  BEROWNE. White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.
  BEROWNE. Nay, then, two treys, an if you grow so nice,
    Metheglin, wort, and malmsey; well run dice!
  LONGAVILLE. I know the reason, lady, why you ask.
  KATHARINE. 'Veal' quoth the Dutchman. Is not 'veal' a calf?
  LONGAVILLE. Let's part the word.
  LONGAVILLE. Look how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
  KATHARINE. Bleat softly, then; the butcher hears you cry.
    As is the razor's edge invisible,
    Above the sense of sense; so sensible
    Seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings,
    Are these the breed of wits so wondered at?
  BOYET. Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.
  ROSALINE. Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.
    Will they not, think you, hang themselves to-night?
    Or ever but in vizards show their faces?
    Immediately they will again be here
    In their own shapes; for it can never be
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Will they return?
  BOYET. They will, they will, God knows,
    And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows;
    Therefore, change favours; and, when they repair,
  BOYET. Fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud:
    Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown,
    If they return in their own shapes to woo?
    Let's mock them still, as well known as disguis'd.
    Let us complain to them what fools were here,
    And wonder what they were, and to what end
    And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
  BOYET. Ladies, withdraw; the gallants are at hand.
         Re-enter the KING, BEROWNE, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN,
                        in their proper habits
  KING. Fair sir, God save you! Where's the Princess?
    Command me any service to her thither?
    And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
    Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
    This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve;
    This is the ape of form, Monsieur the Nice,
    That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice
    The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet.
    This is the flow'r that smiles on every one,
    Pay him the due of 'honey-tongued Boyet.'
        Re-enter the PRINCESS, ushered by BOYET; ROSALINE,
    Till this man show'd thee? And what art thou now?
    To lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
    As the unsullied lily, I protest,
    My lady, to the manner of the days,
    In Russian habit; here they stayed an hour
    I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
    When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
  ROSALINE. All the fool mine?
  ROSALINE. Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
  ROSALINE. There, then, that vizard; that superfluous case
    That hid the worse and show'd the better face.
  KING. We were descried; they'll mock us now downright.
  BEROWNE. Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
    And I will wish thee never more to dance,
    Nor to the motion of a school-boy's tongue,
    Figures pedantical- these summer-flies
    I do forswear them; and I here protest,
    By this white glove- how white the hand, God knows!-
    My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
    Of the old rage; bear with me, I am sick;
    They are infected; in their hearts it lies;
    They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes.
    For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. When you then were here,
  KING. That more than all the world I did respect her.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I will; and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
    What did the Russian whisper in your ear?
    Above this world; adding thereto, moreover,
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. God give thee joy of him! The noble lord
  KING. My faith and this the Princess I did give;
 BEROWNE. Neither of either; I remit both twain.
    I see the trick on't: here was a consent,
    That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
    The ladies did change favours; and then we,
    Following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she.
    And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
    And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
  COSTARD. O Lord, sir, they would know
     Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no?
  BEROWNE. What, are there but three?
  COSTARD. O Lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors, sir, will
    show whereuntil it doth amount. For mine own part, I am, as they
    say, but to parfect one man in one poor man, Pompion the Great,
  BEROWNE. Art thou one of the Worthies?
  COSTARD. It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompey the Great;
    for mine own part, I know not the degree of the Worthy; but I am
  BEROWNE. Go, bid them prepare.
  KING. Berowne, they will shame us; let them not approach.
    To have one show worse than the King's and his company.
  KING. I say they shall not come.
    Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
    Dies in the zeal of that which it presents.
    When great things labouring perish in their birth.
           [Converses apart with the KING, and delivers a paper]
    protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical; too too vain,
    too too vain; but we will put it, as they say, to fortuna de la
    guerra. I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!
    Hector of Troy; the swain, Pompey the Great; the parish curate,
    Alexander; Arinado's page, Hercules; the pedant, Judas
    And if these four Worthies in their first show thrive,
    These four will change habits and present the other five.
  BEROWNE. There is five in the first show.
  BEROWNE. The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool, and
    the boy:
    Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
  BEROWNE. Well said, old mocker; I must needs be friends with thee.
  COSTARD. I Pompey am, Pompey surnam'd the Big-
    Pompey surnam'd the Great,
    And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France.
  BEROWNE. My hat to a halfpenny, Pompey proves the best Worthy.
  NATHANIEL. When in the world I liv'd, I was the world's commander;
  NATHANIEL. When in the world I liv'd, I was the world's commander-
  BEROWNE. Pompey the Great!
  BEROWNE. Take away the conqueror, take away Alisander.
    the conqueror! You will be scrap'd out of the painted cloth for
    will be given to Ajax. He will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror
    Alisander- alas! you see how 'tis- a little o'erparted. But there
    are Worthies a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort.
  BEROWNE. Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer. And now,
    forward; for we have put thee in countenance.
  BEROWNE. False: we have given thee faces.
  HOLOFERNES. But you have outfac'd them all.
  DUMAIN. For the latter end of his name.
  BEROWNE. For the ass to the Jude; give it him- Jud-as, away.
  BOYET. No; he is best indued in the small.
  ARMADO. The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
    The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
    Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
    A man so breathed that certain he would fight ye,
  LONGAVILLE. I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against
    not the bones of the buried; when he breathed, he was a man. But
    I will forward with my device. [To the PRINCESS] Sweet royalty,
    bestow on me the sense of hearing.
  BOYET. [Aside to DUMAIN] Loves her by the foot.
  DUMAIN. [Aside to BOYET] He may not by the yard.
  COSTARD. Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor wench
    is cast away. She's quick; the child brags in her belly already;
  BEROWNE. Greater than Great! Great, great, great Pompey! Pompey the
  BEROWNE. Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates! Stir them on! stir
    them on!
  ARMADO. By the North Pole, I do challenge thee.
  COSTARD. I will not fight with a pole, like a Northern man; I'll
    slash; I'll do it by the sword. I bepray you, let me borrow my
  DUMAIN. Room for the incensed Worthies!
    Pompey is uncasing for the combat? What mean you? You will lose
  DUMAIN. You may not deny it: Pompey hath made the challenge.
  MARCADE. I am sorry, madam; for the news I bring
    Is heavy in my tongue. The King your father-
  BEROWNE. WOrthies away; the scene begins to cloud.
  ARMADO. For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I have seen the
    day of wrong through the little hole of discretion, and I will
    In the converse of breath- your gentleness
    All causes to the purpose of his speed;
    And though the mourning brow of progeny
    Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
    Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
  BEROWNE. Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief;
    And by these badges understand the King.
    Even to the opposed end of our intents;
    Form'd by the eye and therefore, like the eye,
    Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
    Those heavenly eyes that look into these faults
    Our love being yours, the error that love makes
    Your favours, the ambassadors of love;
    And, in our maiden council, rated them
    As bombast and as lining to the time;
    Have we not been; and therefore met your loves
    In their own fashion, like a merriment.
  ROSALINE. We did not quote them so.
  KING. Now, at the latest minute of the hour,
    Full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this,
    If for my love, as there is no such cause,
    Remote from all the pleasures of the world;
    There stay until the twelve celestial signs
    Have brought about the annual reckoning.
    Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
    Then, at the expiration of the year,
    Come, challenge me, challenge me by these deserts;
    Raining the tears of lamentation
    For the remembrance of my father's death.
    Neither intitled in the other's heart.
    To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
    Hence hermit then, my heart is in thy breast.
    But seek the weary beds of people sick.
    With threefold love I wish you all these three.
    Come when the King doth to my lady come;
  DUMAIN. I'll serve thee true and faithfully till then.
  MARIA. At the twelvemonth's end
  LONGAVILLE. I'll stay with patience; but the time is long.
    Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,
    What humble suit attends thy answer there.
    Before I saw you; and the world's large tongue
    That lie within the mercy of your wit.
    And therewithal to win me, if you please,
    Without the which I am not to be won,
    Visit the speechless sick, and still converse
    With all the fierce endeavour of your wit,
    To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
  BEROWNE. To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
  ROSALINE. Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,
    A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
    Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
    Of him that makes it; then, if sickly ears,
    Deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans,
    Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
    But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. [ To the King] Ay, sweet my lord, and so I take
    And then 'twill end.
    votary: I have vow'd to Jaquenetta to hold the plough for her
    hear the dialogue that the two learned men have compiled in
    praise of the Owl and the Cuckoo? It should have followed in the
  KING. Call them forth quickly; we will do so.
    This side is Hiems, Winter; this Ver, the Spring- the one
    maintained by the Owl, th' other by the Cuckoo. Ver, begin.
         Do paint the meadows with delight,
         The cuckoo then on every tree
         And maidens bleach their summer smocks;
         The cuckoo then on every tree
         When icicles hang by the wall,
         And Dick the shepherd blows his nail,
         And Tom bears logs into the hall,
         Then nightly sings the staring owl:
         While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
         When all aloud the wind doth blow,
         And coughing drowns the parson's saw,
         And birds sit brooding in the snow,
         When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,
         Then nightly sings the staring owl:
         While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
  ARMADO. The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of Apollo.
  MACBETH, Thane of Glamis and Cawdor, a general in the King's army
  BANQUO, Thane of Lochaber, a general in the King's army
  SIWARD, Earl of Northumberland, general of the English forces
  HECATE, Queen of the Witches
  The Ghost of Banquo and other Apparitions
  Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, Soldiers, Murtherers, Attendants,
  SECOND WITCH. When the hurlyburly's done,
    When the battle's lost and won.
  THIRD WITCH. That will be ere the set of sun.
  FIRST WITCH. Where the place?
  SECOND WITCH. Upon the heath.
    Hover through the fog and filthy air.                Exeunt.
    As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
  MALCOLM. This is the sergeant
    Say to the King the knowledge of the broil
    As two spent swimmers that do cling together
    And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald-
    Do swarm upon him -from the Western Isles
    Till he faced the slave,
    Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps,
  SERGEANT. As whence the sun 'gins his reflection
    Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
    But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
    As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
    If I say sooth, I must report they were
    So they
    Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe.
    Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
    Or memorize another Golgotha,
  DUNCAN. So well thy words become thee as thy wounds;
  ROSS. God save the King!
    Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
    Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition;
Enter the three Witches.
    "Aroint thee, witch!" the rump-fed ronyon cries.
    Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master the Tiger;
    But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
  SECOND WITCH. I'll give thee a wind.
  THIRD WITCH. And I another.
  FIRST WITCH. I myself have all the other,
    And the very ports they blow,
    All the quarters that they know
    I' the shipman's card.
    Sleep shall neither night nor day
    Posters of the sea and land,
  BANQUO. How far is't call'd to Forres? What are these
    So wither'd and so wild in their attire,
    That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth,
  FIRST WITCH. All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!
  SECOND WITCH. All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!
    Things that do sound so fair? I' the name of truth,
    If you can look into the seeds of time,
    Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
    Stands not within the prospect of belief,
  BANQUO. The earth hath bubbles as the water has,
    And these are of them. Whither are they vanish'd?
  MACBETH. Into the air, and what seem'd corporal melted
    As breath into the wind. Would they had stay'd!
    Or have we eaten on the insane root
    That takes the reason prisoner?
  BANQUO. To the selfsame tune and words. Who's here?
    Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,
    In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day,
    He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
    And pour'd them down before him.
    To give thee, from our royal master, thanks;
    Only to herald thee into his sight,
    Not pay thee.
    He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor.
  BANQUO. What, can the devil speak true?
  ANGUS. Who was the Thane lives yet,
    Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined
    With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
    When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
    Promised no less to them?
    Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
    Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange;
    As happy prologues to the swelling act
    Of the imperial theme-I thank you, gentlemen.
    Against the use of nature? Present fears
    My thought, whose murther yet is but fantastical,
    Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is
    Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould
    But with the aid of use.
    Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
    The leaf to read them. Let us toward the King.
    Our free hearts each to other.
  MACBETH. Till then, enough. Come, friends.             Exeunt.
    Became him like the leaving it; he died
    To throw away the dearest thing he owed
    To find the mind's construction in the face:
    To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved,
    That the proportion both of thanks and payment
  MACBETH. The service and the loyalty lowe,
    Which do but what they should, by doing everything
  DUNCAN. Welcome hither.
    I have begun to plant thee, and will labor
    To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo,
    No less to have done so; let me infold thee
    And hold thee to my heart.
    Wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves
    And you whose places are the nearest, know
    And bind us further to you.
    I'll be myself the harbinger, and make joyful
    The eye wink at the hand; yet let that be
    Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.          Exit.
  LADY MACBETH. "They met me in the day of success, and I have
    learned by the perfectest report they have more in them than
    mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire to question them
    further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished.
    Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came missives from the
    before, these weird sisters saluted me and referred me to the
    thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness,
    that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being
    ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy heart,
    It is too full o' the milk of human kindness
    To catch the nearest way. Thou wouldst be great;
    And that which rather thou dost fear to do
    Than wishest should be undone." Hie thee hither,
    And chastise with the valor of my tongue
    All that impedes thee from the golden round,
    To have thee crown'd withal.
    One of my fellows had the speed of him,
    That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
    And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full
    Stop up the access and passage to remorse,
    And take my milk for gall, your murthering ministers,
    And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell
    That my keen knife see not the wound it makes
    Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
    Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!
    The future in the instant.
    May read strange matters. To beguile the time,
    Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye,
    Your hand, your tongue; look like the innocent flower,
    But be the serpent under it. He that's coming
  MACBETH. We will speak further.
    Leave all the rest to me.                            Exeunt.
  DUNCAN. This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air
    By his loved mansionry that the heaven's breath
    Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed
    In every point twice done, and then done double,
    And the late dignities heap'd up to them,
  DUNCAN. Where's the Thane of Cawdor?
    We coursed him at the heels and had a purpose
    Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs, in compt,
    To make their audit at your Highness' pleasure,
the stage.  Then enter Macbeth.
  MACBETH. If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well
    It were done quickly. If the assassination
    Could trammel up the consequence, and catch,
    Might be the be-all and the end-all -here,
    We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases
    To plague the inventor. This even-handed justice
    Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice
    Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
    Who should against his murtherer shut the door,
    Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan
    Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubin horsed
    Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
    Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
    That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur
    To prick the sides of my intent, but only
    And falls on the other.
  LADY MACBETH. He has almost supp'd. Why have you left the chamber?
  MACBETH. We will proceed no further in this business:
    Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
  LADY MACBETH. Was the hope drunk
    To be the same in thine own act and valor
    Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life
    Like the poor cat i' the adage?
  MACBETH. Prithee, peace!
  LADY MACBETH. What beast wast then
    When you durst do it, then you were a man,
    Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
    Did then adhere, and yet you would make both.
    They have made themselves, and that their fitness now
    How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me-
    And dash'd the brains out had I so sworn as you
    But screw your courage to the sticking-place
    Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey
    That memory, the warder of the brain,
    Shall be a fume and the receipt of reason
    His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
    Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,
    That they have done't?
  LADY MACBETH. Who dares receive it other,
    Away, and mock the time with fairest show:
    False face must hide what the false heart doth know.
  BANQUO. How goes the night, boy?
  FLEANCE. The moon is down; I have not heard the clock.
    Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.
    Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature
    Who's there?
    By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up
    Our will became the servant to defect,
    I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters:
    To you they have show'd some truth.
  MACBETH. I think not of them;
    If you would grant the time.
  MACBETH. Good repose the while.
  BANQUO. Thanks, sir, the like to you.
    She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.     Exit Servant.
    The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.
    I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
    A dagger of the mind, a false creation,
    Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
    I see thee yet, in form as palpable
    Thou marshal'st me the way that I was going,
    Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses,
    Or else worth all the rest. I see thee still,
    It is the bloody business which informs
    Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one half-world
    Pale Hecate's offerings; and wither'd Murther,
    Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf,
    Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
    And take the present horror from the time,
    Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
    I go, and it is done; the bell invites me.
    That summons thee to heaven, or to hell.               Exit.
  LADY MACBETH. That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold;
    What hath quench'd them hath given me fire. Hark! Peace!
    It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman,
    Which gives the stern'st good night. He is about it:
    The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms
    Do mock their charge with snores. I have drugg'd their possets
    That death and nature do contend about them,
    Whether they live or die.
  MACBETH. [Within.] Who's there' what, ho!
  LADY MACBETH. Alack, I am afraid they have awaked
    And 'tis not done. The attempt and not the deed
    Confounds us. Hark! I laid their daggers ready;
    My father as he slept, I had done't.
  MACBETH. I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?
  LADY MACBETH. I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.
    Who lies i' the second chamber?
      "Murther!"
    That they did wake each other. I stood and heard them,
    But they did say their prayers and address'd them
  LADY MACBETH. There are two lodged together.
  MACBETH. One cried, "God bless us!" and "Amen" the other,
    As they had seen me with these hangman's hands.
    Listening their fear, I could not say "Amen,"
    When they did say, "God bless us!"
    After these ways; so, it will make us mad.
    Macbeth does murther sleep" -the innocent sleep,
    Sleep that knits up the ravel'd sleave of care,
  MACBETH. Still it cried, "Sleep no more!" to all the house;
    "Glamis hath murther'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor
    Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
    They must lie there. Go carry them, and smear
    Give me the daggers. The sleeping and the dead
    Are but as pictures; 'tis the eye of childhood
    I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal,
    For it must seem their guilt.         Exit. Knocking within.
    What hands are here? Ha, they pluck out mine eyes!
    Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
    Making the green one red.
    At the south entry. Retire we to our chamber.
    How easy is it then! Your constancy
    Gate, he should have old turning the key. [Knocking within.]
    Knock, knock, knock! Who's there, i' the name of Belzebub? Here's
    [Knocking within.] Knock, knock! Who's there, in th' other
    both the scales against either scale, who committed treason
    Who's there? Faith, here's an English tailor come hither, for
    devil-porter it no further. I had thought to have let in some of
    all professions, that go the primrose way to the everlasting
    bonfire. [Knocking within.] Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the
                                                 Opens the gate.
  PORTER. Faith, sir, we were carousing till the second cock; and
    it provokes and unprovokes: it provokes the desire, but it takes
    away the performance. Therefore much drink may be said to be an
    equivocates him in a sleep, and giving him the lie, leaves him.
  MACDUFF. I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.
  PORTER. That it did, sir, i' the very throat on me; but requited
  MACDUFF. Is the King stirring, worthy Thane?
    I have almost slipp'd the hour.
    This is the door.
  LENNOX. Goes the King hence today?
    Our chimneys were blown down, and, as they say,
    Lamentings heard i' the air, strange screams of death,
    New hatch'd to the woeful time. The obscure bird
    Clamor'd the livelong night. Some say the earth
    Cannot conceive nor name thee.
  MACBETH. LENNOX. What's the matter?
    Most sacrilegious murther hath broke ope
    The Lord's anointed temple and stole thence
    The life o' the building.
  MACBETH. What is't you say? the life?
  MACDUFF. Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight
    See, and then speak yourselves.
    Ring the alarum bell. Murther and treason!
    To countenance this horror! Ring the bell.       Bell rings.
  LADY MACBETH. What's the business,
    The sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!
    Would murther as it fell.
    Our royal master's murther'd.
    Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself,
    The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
    The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
    Is stopped, the very source of it is stopp'd.
  MACDUFF. Your royal father's murther'd.
    So were their daggers, which unwiped we found
    Upon their pillows.
    Was to be trusted with them.
    That I did kill them.
    Outrun the pauser reason. Here lay Duncan,
    For ruin's wasteful entrance; there, the murtherers,
    Steep'd in the colors of their trade, their daggers
  MACDUFF. Look to the lady.
    Upon the foot of motion.
  BANQUO. Look to the lady.
    To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us.
    In the great hand of God I stand, and thence
    Against the undivulged pretense I fight
    And meet i' the hall together.
  MALCOLM. What will you do? Let's not consort with them.
    Which the false man does easy. I'll to England.
    Shall keep us both the safer. Where we are
    There's daggers in men's smiles; the near in blood,
  MALCOLM. This murtherous shaft that's shot
    Is to avoid the aim. Therefore to horse;
    But shift away. There's warrant in that theft
    Which steals itself when there's no mercy left.
    Within the volume of which time I have seen
  ROSS. Ah, good father,
    Thou seest the heavens, as troubled with man's act,
    Threaten his bloody stage. By the clock 'tis day,
    And yet dark night strangles the traveling lamp.
    Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame,
    That darkness does the face of earth entomb,
    Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last
    Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
    Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
    Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make
  OLD MAN. 'Tis said they eat each other.
  ROSS. They did so, to the amazement of mine eyes
    Here comes the good Macduff.
    How goes the world, sir, now?
  ROSS. Alas, the day!
    What good could they pretend?
    Malcolm and Donalbain, the King's two sons,
    Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them
    Suspicion of the deed.
    And guardian of their bones.
  ROSS. Well, I will thither.
  MACDUFF. Well, may you see things well done there.
  ROSS. Farewell, father.
    As the weird women promised, and I fear
    But that myself should be the root and father
    Of many kings. If there come truth from them
    (As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine)
    Why, by the verities on thee made good,
    May they not be my oracles as well
    Command upon me, to the which my duties
  BANQUO. As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
    'Twixt this and supper. Go not my horse the better,
    I must become a borrower of the night
    Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
    When therewithal we shall have cause of state
    And so I do commend you to their backs.
    Till supper time alone. While then, God be with you!
  ATTENDANT. They are, my lord, without the palace gate.
  MACBETH. Bring them before us.                 Exit Attendant.
    Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters
    When first they put the name of King upon me
    And bade them speak to him; then prophet-like
    They hail'd him father to a line of kings.
    Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown
    For them the gracious Duncan have I murther'd,
    Put rancors in the vessel of my peace
    Only for them, and mine eternal jewel
    Given to the common enemy of man,
    To make them kings -the seed of Banquo kings!
    Rather than so, come, Fate, into the list,
    And champion me to the utterance! Who's there?
        Re-enter Attendant, with two Murtherers.
    Now go to the door, and stay there till we call.
    Was it not yesterday we spoke together?
  MACBETH. Well then, now
    That it was he in the times past which held you
    How you were borne in hand, how cross'd, the instruments,
    Who wrought with them, and all things else that might
  MACBETH. I did so, and went further, which is now
    Whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave
  MACBETH. Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men,
    All by the name of dogs. The valued file
    Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
    The housekeeper, the hunter, every one
    According to the gift which bounteous nature
    Particular addition, from the bill
    That writes them all alike; and so of men.
    Now if you have a station in the file,
    Not i' the worst rank of manhood, say it,
    Grapples you to the heart and love of us,
    Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
    I do to spite the world.
  FIRST MURTHERER. And I another
    Who I myself struck down. And thence it is
    Masking the business from the common eye
    Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time,
    And something from the palace (always thought
    To leave no rubs nor botches in the work-
    Than is his father's, must embrace the fate
                                              Exeunt Murtherers.
  LADY MACBETH. Say to the King I would attend his leisure
    With them they think on? Things without all remedy
  MACBETH. We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it.
    But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer,
    In the affliction of these terrible dreams
    That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead,
    Than on the torture of the mind to lie
    Can touch him further.
    Unsafe the while, that we
    Must lave our honors in these flattering streams,
    Disguising what they are.
  LADY MACBETH. But in them nature's copy's not eterne.
  MACBETH. There's comfort yet; they are assailable.
    Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown
    Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done
  MACBETH. Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
    Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night,
    Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day,
    Which keeps me pale! Light thickens, and the crow
    Makes wing to the rooky wood;
    Whiles night's black agents to their preys do rouse.
    Thou marvel'st at my words, but hold thee still:
    Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
    So, prithee, go with me.                             Exeunt.
A park near the palace.
Enter three Murtherers.
  FIRST MURTHERER. But who did bid thee join with us?
    To the direction just.
    Now spurs the lated traveler apace
    To gain the timely inn, and near approaches
  BANQUO. [Within.] Give us a light there, ho!
  SECOND MURTHERER. Then 'tis he; the rest
    That are within the note of expectation
    Already are i' the court.
    So all men do -from hence to the palace gate
    Make it their walk.
  THIRD MURTHERER. Who did strike out the light?
  FIRST MURTHERER. Wast not the way?
  THIRD MURTHERER. There's but one down; the son is fled.
A Hall in the palace. A banquet prepared.
    And last the hearty welcome.
    And play the humble host.
    For my heart speaks they are welcome.
                Enter first Murtherer to the door.
  MACBETH. See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks.
    Both sides are even; here I'll sit i' the midst.
    The table round. [Approaches the door.] There's blood upon thy
  MURTHERER. 'Tis Banquo's then.
  MACBETH. 'Tis better thee without than he within.
  MACBETH. Thou art the best o' the cut-throats! Yet he's good
    That did the like for Fleance. If thou didst it,
    Thou art the nonpareil.
    Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,
    As broad and general as the casing air;
    There the grown serpent lies; the worm that's fled
    No teeth for the present. Get thee gone. Tomorrow
                                                 Exit Murtherer.
    You do not give the cheer. The feast is sold
    From thence the sauce to meat is ceremony;
    Were the graced person of our Banquo present,
    Who may I rather challenge for unkindness
    Which might appal the devil.
    This is the very painting of your fear;
    This is the air-drawn dagger which you said
    Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts,
  MACBETH. Prithee, see there! Behold! Look! Lo! How say you?
    Shall be the maws of kites.                      Exit Ghost.
  MACBETH. Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time,
    Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal;
    Ay, and since too, murthers have been perform'd
    Too terrible for the ear. The time has been,
    That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
    And there an end; but now they rise again,
    With twenty mortal murthers on their crowns,
    Than such a murther is.
    I drink to the general joy o' the whole table,
  LORDS. Our duties and the pledge.
  MACBETH. Avaunt, and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee!
    But as a thing of custom. 'Tis no other,
    Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
    Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
    The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger;
    And dare me to the desert with thy sword.
    If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
  LADY MACBETH. You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting,
    Even to the disposition that I owe
    And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks
    Stand not upon the order of your going,
  MACBETH. will have blood; they say blood will have blood.
    The secret'st man of blood. What is the night?
  MACBETH. I hear it by the way, but I will send.
    There's not a one of them but in his house
    And betimes I will, to the weird sisters.
    More shall they speak; for now I am bent to know,
    By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good
    Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.
  LADY MACBETH. You lack the season of all natures, sleep.
    Is the initiate fear that wants hard use.
Enter the three Witches, meeting Hecate.
    And I, the mistress of your charms,
    Or show the glory of our art?
    Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do,
    And at the pit of Acheron
    Meet me i' the morning. Thither he
    I am for the air; this night I'll spend
    Upon the corner of the moon
    As by the strength of their illusion
Enter Lennox and another Lord.
    Which can interpret farther; only I say
    And the right valiant Banquo walk'd too late,
    Who cannot want the thought, how monstrous
    To kill their gracious father? Damned fact!
    In pious rage, the two delinquents tear
    That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
    To hear the men deny't. So that, I say,
    As, an't please heaven, he shall not -they should find
    What 'twere to kill a father; so should Fleance.
    His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear,
    From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth,
    Lives in the English court and is received
    Of the most pious Edward with such grace
    That the malevolence of fortune nothing
    Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff
    Is gone to pray the holy King, upon his aid
    That by the help of these, with Him above
    To ratify the work, we may again
    Hath so exasperate the King that he
    And hums, as who should say, "You'll rue the time
    Fly to the court of England and unfold
A cavern. In the middle, a boiling cauldron. Thunder.
Enter the three Witches.
  FIRST WITCH. Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd.
  SECOND WITCH. Thrice and once the hedge-pig whined.
  FIRST WITCH. Round about the cauldron go;
    In the poison'd entrails throw.
    Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.
    In the cauldron boil and bake;
    Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark,
    Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark,
    Sliver'd in the moon's eclipse,
    Make the gruel thick and slab.
    Add thereto a tiger's chawdron,
    For the ingredients of our cawdron.
    Then the charm is firm and good.
            Enter Hecate to the other three Witches.
    And everyone shall share i' the gains.
    And now about the cauldron sing,
  SECOND WITCH. By the pricking of my thumbs,
    Though you untie the winds and let them fight
    Against the churches, though the yesty waves
    Though castles topple on their warders' heads,
    Their heads to their foundations, though the treasure
    Of nature's germaines tumble all together
  FIRST WITCH. Say, if thou'dst rather hear it from our mouths,
    From the murtherer's gibbet throw
    Into the flame.
    Beware the Thane of Fife. Dismiss me. Enough.
  FIRST WITCH. He will not be commanded. Here's another,
    More potent than the first.
  MACBETH. Had I three ears, I'd hear thee.
  MACBETH. Then live, Macduff. What need I fear of thee?
    That rises like the issue of a king,
    And wears upon his baby brow the round
    Who can impress the forest, bid the tree
    Rebellion's head, rise never till the Wood
    Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
    A show of eight Kings, the last with a glass in his hand;
  MACBETH. Thou are too like the spirit of Banquo Down!
    Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
    A third is like the former. Filthy hags!
    What, will the line stretch out to the crack of doom?
    Another yet! A seventh! I'll see no more!
    And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass
    For the blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me,
    And points at them for his. What, is this so?
    And show the best of our delights.
    I'll charm the air to give a sound,
                                        then vanish with Hecate.
  MACBETH. are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour
    Stand ay accursed in the calendar!
    Come in, without there!
  MACBETH. Saw you the weird sisters?
  MACBETH. Came they not by you?
  MACBETH. Infected be the 'air whereon they ride,
    And damn'd all those that trust them! I did hear
    Unless the deed go with it. From this moment
    Seize upon Fife, give to the edge o' the sword
    But no more sights! -Where are these gentlemen?
    Come, bring me where they are.                       Exeunt.
  LADY MACDUFF. What had he done, to make him fly the land?
    Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.
    He wants the natural touch; for the poor wren,
    Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
    All is the fear and nothing is the love;
    As little is the wisdom, where the flight
    The fits o' the season. I dare not speak much further;
    But cruel are the times when we are traitors
    Things at the worst will cease or else climb upward
    To what they were before. My pretty cousin,
  LADY MACDUFF. Father'd he is, and yet he's fatherless.
  LADY MACDUFF. Sirrah, your father's dead.
  SON. As birds do, Mother.
  SON. With what I get, I mean; and so do they.
  LADY MACDUFF. Poor bird! Thou'ldst never fear the net nor lime,
    The pitfall nor the gin.
  SON. Why should I, Mother? Poor birds they are not set for.
    My father is not dead, for all your saying.
  LADY MACDUFF. Yes, he is dead. How wilt thou do for father?
    With wit enough for thee.
  SON. Was my father a traitor, Mother?
  SON. And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?
  SON. Who must hang them?
  LADY MACDUFF. Why, the honest men.
  SON. Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are liars and
    swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang up them.
  LADY MACDUFF. Now, God help thee, poor monkey! But how wilt thou do
    for a father?
    were a good sign that I should quickly have a new father.
  LADY MACDUFF. Whither should I fly?
    Accounted dangerous folly. Why then, alas,
    To say I have done no harm -What are these faces?
                      Enter Murtherers.
  SON. He has kill'd me, Mother.
                            Exit Lady Macduff, crying "Murther!"
                               Exeunt Murtherers, following her.
England. Before the King's palace.
  MALCOLM. Let us seek out some desolate shade and there
  MACDUFF. Let us rather
    Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men
    Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
    As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
    Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.
    Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,
  MALCOLM. Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
    For goodness dare not check thee. Wear thou thy wrongs;
    The title is affeer'd. Fare thee well, lord.
    I would not be the villain that thou think'st
    For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp
    And the rich East to boot.
    I think our country sinks beneath the yoke;
    When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head,
    All the particulars of vice so grafted
    That, when they shall be open'd, black Macbeth
    Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state
  MACDUFF. Not in the legions
    That has a name. But there's no bottom, none,
    The untimely emptying of the happy throne,
    And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink.
    We have willing dames enough; there cannot be
    As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
  MALCOLM. With this there grows
    I should cut off the nobles for their lands,
    Desire his jewels and this other's house,
    Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
    Destroying them for wealth.
    Of your mere own. All these are portable,
    With other graces weigh'd.
    I have no relish of them, but abound
    In the division of each several crime,
    Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
    Uproar the universal peace, confound
    Since that the truest issue of thy throne
    And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father
    Was a most sainted king; the queen that bore thee,
    Died every day she lived. Fare thee well!
    Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts
    By many of these trains hath sought to win me
    Deal between thee and me! For even now
    Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,
    Now we'll together, and the chance of goodness
  MALCOLM. Well, more anon. Comes the King forth, I pray you?
  DOCTOR. Ay, sir, there are a crew of wretched souls
  MACDUFF. What's the disease he means?
  MALCOLM. 'Tis call'd the evil:
    All swol'n and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
    Hanging a golden stamp about their necks
    To the succeeding royalty he leaves
  MACDUFF. My ever gentle cousin, welcome hither.
    Be call'd our mother, but our grave. Where nothing,
    Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air,
    Is there scarce ask'd for who, and good men's lives
    Expire before the flowers in their caps,
    Dying or ere they sicken.
  MALCOLM. What's the newest grief?
  ROSS. That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker;
  MACDUFF. The tyrant has not batter'd at their peace?
  ROSS. No, they were well at peace when I did leave 'em.
  ROSS. When I came hither to transport the tidings,
    Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumor
    Which was to my belief witness'd the rather,
    For that I saw the tyrant's power afoot.
    Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland
    To doff their dire distresses.
  MALCOLM. Be't their comfort
    We are coming thither. Gracious England hath
    This comfort with the like! But I have words
    That would be howl'd out in the desert air,
    Where hearing should not latch them.
  MACDUFF. What concern they?
    But in it shares some woe, though the main part
    Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
    That ever yet they heard.
    Savagely slaughter'd. To relate the manner
    Were, on the quarry of these murther'd deer,
    To add the death of you.
    Whispers the o'erfraught heart, and bids it break.
  MACDUFF. And I must be from thence!
    What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
    And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
    They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am,
    Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
    Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now!
  MALCOLM. Be this the whetstone of your sword. Let grief
    Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.
  MACDUFF. O, I could play the woman with mine eyes
    Come, go we to the King; our power is ready,
    Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
    Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may,
    The night is long that never finds the day.          Exeunt.
Dunsinane. Anteroom in the castle.
  GENTLEWOMAN. Since his Majesty went into the field, have seen her
  DOCTOR. A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the
    benefit of sleep and do the effects of watching! In this slumbery
    agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances,
  GENTLEWOMAN. Neither to you nor anyone, having no witness to
  GENTLEWOMAN. Ay, but their sense is shut.
    satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.
  LADY MACBETH. Out, damned spot! Out, I say! One- two -why then 'tis
    power to account? Yet who would have thought the old man to have
    will these hands neer be clean? No more o' that, my lord, no more
  LADY MACBETH. Here's the smell of the blood still. All the perfumes
  DOCTOR. What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.
  GENTLEWOMAN. I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the
    dignity of the whole body.
    which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their
  LADY MACBETH. To bed, to bed; there's knocking at the gate. Come,
    To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets.
    More needs she the divine than the physician.
    Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
    His uncle Siward, and the good Macduff.
    Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes
    Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
    Excite the mortified man.
    Shall we well meet them; that way are they coming.
  CAITHNESS. Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?
    Of all the gentry. There is Seward's son
    Protest their first of manhood.
  MENTEITH. What does the tyrant?
    Some say he's mad; others, that lesser hate him,
    Within the belt of rule.
    His secret murthers sticking on his hands,
  MENTEITH. Who then shall blame
    Itself for being there?
    Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal,
    To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.
Dunsinane. A room in the castle.
  MACBETH. Bring me no more reports; let them fly all!
    I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm?
    Shall e'er have power upon thee." Then fly, false Thanes,
    And mingle with the English epicures!
    The mind I sway by and the heart I bear
    The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!
    Is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf,
    I must not look to have; but in their stead,
    Which the poor heart would fain deny and dare not.
    Send out more horses, skirr the country round,
    Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
    Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
    Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff
    Which weighs upon the heart?
  DOCTOR. Therein the patient
  MACBETH. Throw physic to the dogs, I'll none of it.
    Seyton, send out. Doctor, the Thanes fly from me.
    I would applaud thee to the very echo,
    Would scour these English hence? Hearst thou of them?
  MALCOLM. Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
    And bear't before him; thereby shall we shadow
  SIWARD. We learn no other but the confident tyrant
    For where there is advantage to be given,
    Both more and less have given him the revolt,
    Attend the true event, and put we on
    Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,
    Towards which advance the war.
Dunsinane. Within the castle.
  MACBETH. Hang out our banners on the outward walls;
    Will laugh a siege to scorn. Here let them lie
    Till famine and the ague eat them up.
    Were they not forced with those that should be ours,
    We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
    And beat them backward home.
  SEYTON. It is the cry of women, my good lord.            Exit.
  MACBETH. I have almost forgot the taste of fears:
    To the last syllable of recorded time;
    That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
    And then is heard no more. It is a tale
  MESSENGER. As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
    Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive,
    Till famine cling thee; if thy speech be sooth,
    To doubt the equivocation of the fiend
    I 'gin to be aweary of the sun
    And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.
    Ring the alarum bell! Blow, wind! Come, wrack!
Dunsinane.  Before the castle.
Enter Malcolm, old Siward, Macduff, and their Army, with boughs.
    Do we but find the tyrant's power tonight,
  MACDUFF. Make all our trumpets speak, give them all breath,
Dunsinane.  Before the castle.  Alarums.
    But bear-like I must fight the course. What's he
    I'll prove the lie thou speak'st.
  MACDUFF. That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!
    Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth,
    I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;
  SIWARD. This way, my lord; the castle's gently render'd.
    The noble Thanes do bravely in the war,
  SIWARD. Enter, sir, the castle.
Another part of the field.
  MACBETH. Why should I play the Roman fool and die
    On mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes
    Do better upon them.
  MACBETH. Of all men else I have avoided thee.
    But get thee back, my soul is too much charged
    Than terms can give thee out!                    They fight.
    As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
    And let the angel whom thou still hast served
    Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb
    And be these juggling fiends no more believed
    That keep the word of promise to our ear
    And break it to our hope. I'll not fight with thee.
  MACDUFF. Then yield thee, coward,
    And live to be the show and gaze o' the time.
    We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
    "Here may you see the tyrant."
    To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet,
    And to be baited with the rabble's curse.
    Yet I will try the last. Before my body
the other Thanes, and Soldiers.
  MALCOLM. I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.
  SIWARD. Some must go off, and yet, by these I see,
    In the unshrinking station where he fought,
  ROSS. Ay, and brought off the field. Your cause of sorrow
    Must not be measured by his worth, for then
  ROSS. Ay, on the front.
  SIWARD. Why then, God's soldier be he!
    I would not wish them to a fairer death.
    I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl
    That speak my salutation in their minds,
    Henceforth be Earls, the first that ever Scotland
    Which would be planted newly with the time,
    That fled the snares of watchful tyranny,
    Producing forth the cruel ministers
    That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace
  VINCENTIO, the Duke
  ANGELO, the Deputy
  Two other like Gentlemen
  VARRIUS, a gentleman, servant to the Duke
  MARIANA, betrothed to Angelo
  DUKE. Of government the properties to unfold
    Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
    My strength can give you; then no more remains
    And let them work. The nature of our people,
    Our city's institutions, and the terms
    From which we would not have you warp. Call hither,
    And given his deputation all the organs
    Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
    Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
    As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touch'd
    Herself the glory of a creditor,
    Hold, therefore, Angelo-
    Let there be some more test made of my metal,
    Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours.
    That we may bring you something on the way.
    So to enforce or qualify the laws
    I'll privily away. I love the people,
    But do not like to stage me to their eyes;
    Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
    To look into the bottom of my place:
  ANGELO. 'Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together,
Enter Lucio and two other GENTLEMEN
  LUCIO. If the Duke, with the other dukes, come not to composition
    with the King of Hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of
  LUCIO. Thou conclud'st like the sanctimonious pirate that went to
    sea with the Ten Commandments, but scrap'd one out of the table.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Why, 'twas a commandment to command the captain
    and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to steal.
    There's not a soldier of us all that, in the thanksgiving before
    meat, do relish the petition well that prays for peace.
  LUCIO. I believe thee; for I think thou never wast where grace was
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.
  LUCIO. I grant; as there may between the lists and the velvet.
    Thou art the list.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. And thou the velvet; thou art good velvet; thou'rt
    a three-pil'd piece, I warrant thee. I had as lief be a list of
    thy health; but, whilst I live, forget to drink after thee.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or
    of thee.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. How now! which of your hips has the most profound
  MRS. OVERDONE. Well, well! there's one yonder arrested and carried
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Who's that, I pray thee?
    carried away; and, which is more, within these three days his
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Besides, you know, it draws something near to the
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. But most of all agreeing with the proclamation.
  LUCIO. Away; let's go learn the truth of it.
  MRS. OVERDONE. Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what
    with the gallows, and what with poverty, I am custom-shrunk.
    How now! what's the news with you?
  MRS. OVERDONE. What! is there a maid with child by him?
  POMPEY. No; but there's a woman with maid by him. You have not
   heard of the proclamation, have you?
  POMPEY. All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be pluck'd down.
  MRS. OVERDONE. And what shall become of those in the city?
  POMPEY. They shall stand for seed; they had gone down too, but that
    a wise burgher put in for them.
  MRS. OVERDONE. But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be
  POMPEY. To the ground, mistress.
  MRS. OVERDONE. Why, here's a change indeed in the commonwealth!
    be your tapster still. Courage, there will be pity taken on you;
    you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you will
  POMPEY. Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the provost to prison;
    and there's Madam Juliet.                             Exeunt
  CLAUDIO. Thus can the demigod Authority
    As surfeit is the father of much fast,
    So every scope by the immoderate use
    Like rats that ravin down their proper bane,
    certain of my creditors; and yet, to say the truth, I had as lief
    have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment.
  LUCIO. A hundred, if they'll do you any good. Is lechery so look'd
    You know the lady; she is fast my wife,
    Save that we do the denunciation lack
    Remaining in the coffer of her friends.
    Till time had made them for us. But it chances
    And the new deputy now for the Duke-
    Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
    Or whether that the body public be
    A horse whereon the governor doth ride,
    Who, newly in the seat, that it may know
    He can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
    Whether the tyranny be in his place,
    Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
    And none of them been worn; and, for a name,
    Now puts the drowsy and neglected act
    Send after the Duke, and appeal to him.
    I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service:
    This day my sister should the cloister enter,
    And there receive her approbation;
    Acquaint her with the danger of my state;
    To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him.
  LUCIO. I pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the like,
    which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the
  DUKE. No, holy father; throw away that thought;
    Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
    Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee
    More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
    How I have ever lov'd the life removed,
    For so I have strew'd it in the common ear,
    That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,
    Having bound up the threat'ning twigs of birch,
    Only to stick it in their children's sight
    For terror, not to use, in time the rod
    Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead;
    And liberty plucks justice by the nose;
    The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
    Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
    'Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
    For what I bid them do; for we bid this be done,
    When evil deeds have their permissive pass
    And not the punishment. Therefore, indeed, my father,
    I have on Angelo impos'd the office;
    And yet my nature never in the fight
    I will, as 'twere a brother of your order,
    Visit both prince and people. Therefore, I prithee,
    Supply me with the habit, and instruct me
  ISABELLA. And have you nuns no farther privileges?
  FRANCISCA. Are not these large enough?
    But rather wishing a more strict restraint
    Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.
    Turn you the key, and know his business of him:
    But in the presence of the prioress;
    As bring me to the sight of Isabella,
    A novice of this place, and the fair sister
    To her unhappy brother Claudio?
  ISABELLA. Why her 'unhappy brother'? Let me ask
    The rather, for I now must make you know
  LUCIO. Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you.
    With maids to seem the lapwing, and to jest,
  ISABELLA. You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.
    Your brother and his lover have embrac'd.
    That from the seedness the bare fallow brings
  ISABELLA. Adoptedly, as school-maids change their names
  LUCIO. This is the point.
    By those that know the very nerves of state,
    The wanton stings and motions of the sense,
    With profits of the mind, study and fast.
    Which have for long run by the hideous law,
    Under whose heavy sense your brother's life
    And follows close the rigour of the statute
    Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
    'Twixt you and your poor brother.
    Already, and, as I hear, the Provost hath
  LUCIO. Assay the pow'r you have.
    And make us lose the good we oft might win
    Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
    All their petitions are as freely theirs
    As they themselves would owe them.
    No longer staying but to give the Mother
    Commend me to my brother; soon at night
Enter ANGELO, ESCALUS, a JUSTICE, PROVOST, OFFICERS, and other ATTENDANTS
  ANGELO. We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
    Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
    Their perch, and not their terror.
    Let us be keen, and rather cut a little
    Whom I would save, had a most noble father.
    That, in the working of your own affections,
    Or that the resolute acting of our blood
    Whether you had not sometime in your life
    And pull'd the law upon you.
    Another thing to fall. I not deny
    The jury, passing on the prisoner's life,
    May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
    Guiltier than him they try. What's open made to justice,
    That justice seizes. What knows the laws
    For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,
  ANGELO. Where is the Provost?
    For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.        Exit PROVOST
  ELBOW. Come, bring them away; if these be good people in a
    commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in common houses,
    I know no law; bring them away.
  ANGELO. How now, sir! What's your name, and what's the matter?
  ELBOW. If it please your honour, I am the poor Duke's constable,
  ANGELO. Benefactors! Well- what benefactors are they? Are they not
  ELBOW. If it please your honour, I know not well what they are; but
    precise villains they are, that I am sure of, and void of all
    profanation in the world that good Christians ought to have.
  ANGELO. Go to; what quality are they of? Elbow is your name? Why
    woman; whose house, sir, was, as they say, pluck'd down in the
  ESCALUS. Dost thou detest her therefore?
    adultery, and all uncleanliness there.
  ESCALUS. By the woman's means?
  ELBOW. Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable man,
    honour's reverence, for stew'd prunes. Sir, we had but two in the
    such dishes; they are not China dishes, but very good dishes.
  ESCALUS. Go to, go to; no matter for the dish, sir.
  POMPEY. No, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in the
    right; but to the point. As I say, this Mistress Elbow, being, as
    said, for prunes; and having but two in the dish, as I said,
    Master Froth here, this very man, having eaten the rest, as I
    said, and, as I say, paying for them very honestly; for, as you
  POMPEY. Very well; you being then, if you be rememb'red, cracking
    the stones of the foresaid prunes-
  POMPEY. Why, very well; I telling you then, if you be rememb'red,
    that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing you
    wot of, unless they kept very good diet, as I told you-
  POMPEY. Why, very well then-
  ESCALUS. Come, you are a tedious fool. To the purpose: what was
    fourscore pound a year; whose father died at Hallowmas- was't not
    I say, in a lower chair, sir; 'twas in the Bunch of Grapes,
  POMPEY. Why, very well then; I hope here be truths.
    When nights are longest there; I'll take my leave,
    And leave you to the hearing of the cause,
    Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
  POMPEY. I'll be suppos'd upon a book his face is the worst thing
    about him. Good then; if his face be the worst thing about him,
    how could Master Froth do the constable's wife any harm? I would
  ESCALUS. He's in the right, constable; what say you to it?
  ELBOW. First, an it like you, the house is a respected house; next,
  ELBOW. Varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicket varlet; the time is
  ESCALUS. Which is the wiser here, Justice or Iniquity? Is this
    the poor Duke's officer. Prove this, thou wicked Hannibal, or
    I'll have mine action of batt'ry on thee.
    courses till thou know'st what they are.
    varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art to continue now,
  POMPEY. Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.
  ESCALUS. Nine! Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master Froth, I
    would not have you acquainted with tapsters: they will draw you,
    Master Froth, and you will hang them. Get you gone, and let me
    Come you hither to me, Master Tapster; what's your name, Master
  ESCALUS. Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you; so
    that, in the beastliest sense, you are Pompey the Great. Pompey,
    tapster. Are you not? Come, tell me true; it shall be the better
    think of the trade, Pompey? Is it a lawful trade?
  POMPEY. If the law would allow it, sir.
  ESCALUS. But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shall not be
  POMPEY. Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of
    the city?
  POMPEY. Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then. If
    your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you
    need not to fear the bawds.
    year together, you'll be glad to give out a commission for more
    heads; if this law hold in Vienna ten year, I'll rent the fairest
    shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine.
  ESCALUS. Come hither to me, Master Elbow; come hither, Master
  ESCALUS. I thought, by the readiness in the office, you had
    continued in it some time. You say seven years together?
    to put you so oft upon't. Are there not men in your ward
  ELBOW. Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters; as they are
    chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; I do it for some
  ESCALUS. Look you, bring me in the names of some six or seven, the
  ESCALUS. It grieves me for the death of Claudio;
    But there's no remedy.
    Pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
Another room in ANGELO'S house
  ANGELO. Now, what's the matter, Provost?
  ANGELO. Did not I tell thee yea? Hadst thou not order?
    What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
  SERVANT. Here is the sister of the man condemn'd
    See you the fornicatress be remov'd;
    And most desire should meet the blow of justice;
  ANGELO. Well; the matter?
  ISABELLA. I have a brother is condemn'd to die;
    And not my brother.
  PROVOST. [Aside] Heaven give thee moving graces.
  ANGELO. Condemn the fault and not the actor of it!
    Mine were the very cipher of a function,
    To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
    And let go by the actor.
    I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!
    And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.
  ISABELLA. But might you do't, and do the world no wrong,
    Not the king's crown nor the deputed sword,
    The marshal's truncheon nor the judge's robe,
    Become them with one half so good a grace
    And you were Isabel! Should it then be thus?
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Ay, touch him; there's the vein.
  ANGELO. Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
    Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once;
    And He that might the vantage best have took
    Found out the remedy. How would you be
    If He, which is the top of judgment, should
    And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
    It is the law, not I condemn your brother.
    Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
    We kill the fowl of season; shall we serve heaven
    If the first that did th' edict infringe
    Either now or by remissness new conceiv'd,
    But here they live to end.
    For then I pity those I do not know,
    Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
    Your brother dies to-morrow; be content.
  ISABELLA. So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
    Thou rather, with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt,
    Splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
    Than the soft myrtle. But man, proud man,
    As makes the angels weep; who, with our speens,
    Would all themselves laugh mortal.
  ISABELLA. We cannot weigh our brother with ourself.
    Great men may jest with saints: 'tis wit in them;
    But in the less foul profanation.
  ISABELLA. That in the captain's but a choleric word
    Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.
  ANGELO. Why do you put these sayings upon me?
  ISABELLA. Because authority, though it err like others,
    That skins the vice o' th' top. Go to your bosom,
    Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
    That's like my brother's fault. If it confess
    Against my brother's life.
  ISABELLA. Not with fond sicles of the tested gold,
    Or stones, whose rate are either rich or poor
    As fancy values them; but with true prayers
    That shall be up at heaven and enter there
  ANGELO. From thee; even from thy virtue!
    The tempter or the tempted, who sins most?
    That, lying by the violet in the sun,
    Do as the carrion does, not as the flow'r,
    Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary,
    And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!
    That make her good? O, let her brother live!
    Thieves for their robbery have authority
    When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her,
    To sin in loving virtue. Never could the strumpet,
  PROVOST. I am the Provost. What's your will, good friar?
    I come to visit the afflicted spirits
    Here in the prison. Do me the common right
    To let me see them, and to make me know
    The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
    To them accordingly.
    Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
    More fit to do another such offence
  DUKE. Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
  JULIET. I do; and bear the shame most patiently.
  DUKE. Love you the man that wrong'd you?
  JULIET. Yes, as I love the woman that wrong'd him.
  DUKE. So then, it seems, your most offenceful act
  JULIET. I do confess it, and repent it, father.
    As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
    And take the shame with joy.
    And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
    Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
    Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls
    Let's write 'good angel' on the devil's horn;
    'Tis not the devil's crest.
    How now, who's there?
  ANGELO. Teach her the way. [Exit SERVANT] O heavens!
    And dispossessing all my other parts
    So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons;
    Come all to help him, and so stop the air
    Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
    Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
    Than to demand what 'tis. Your brother cannot live.
  ANGELO. Ha! Fie, these filthy vices! It were as good
    Which had you rather- that the most just law
    Now took your brother's life; or, to redeem him,
    I had rather give my body than my soul.
    Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
    I, now the voice of the recorded law,
    Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life;
    Might there not be a charity in sin
    To save this brother's life?
    To have it added to the faults of mine,
    Your sense pursues not mine; either you are ignorant
    When it doth tax itself; as these black masks
    Your brother is to die.
    Accountant to the law upon that pain.
  ANGELO. Admit no other way to save his life,
    As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
    But, in the loss of question, that you, his sister,
    Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
    Could fetch your brother from the manacles
    Of the all-binding law; and that there were
    No earthly mean to save him but that either
    You must lay down the treasures of your body
  ISABELLA. As much for my poor brother as myself;
    That is, were I under the terms of death,
  ANGELO. Then must your brother die.
  ISABELLA. And 'twere the cheaper way:
    Better it were a brother died at once
  ANGELO. Were not you, then, as cruel as the sentence
  ANGELO. You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant;
    And rather prov'd the sliding of your brother
    I something do excuse the thing I hate
  ISABELLA. Else let my brother die,
  ISABELLA. Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves,
    Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
    Women, help heaven! Men their creation mar
    In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail;
    By putting on the destin'd livery.
    Let me intreat you speak the former language.
  ISABELLA. My brother did love Juliet,
    To pluck on others.
    I will proclaim thee, Angelo, look for't.
    Sign me a present pardon for my brother
    Or, with an outstretch'd throat, I'll tell the world aloud
  ANGELO. Who will believe thee, Isabel?
    And now I give my sensual race the rein:
    That banish what they sue for; redeem thy brother
    Or else he must not only die the death,
    Or, by the affection that now guides me most,
    That bear in them one and the self-same tongue
    Either of condemnation or approof,
    Bidding the law make curtsy to their will;
    To follow as it draws! I'll to my brother.
    Though he hath fall'n by prompture of the blood,
    On twenty bloody blocks, he'd yield them up
    Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die:
    More than our brother is our chastity.
  DUKE. So, then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
  CLAUDIO. The miserable have no other medicine
  DUKE. Be absolute for death; either death or life
    Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life.
    If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
    Servile to all the skyey influences,
    For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
    After the moon. If thou art rich, thou'rt poor;
    And Death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none;
    For thine own bowels which do call thee sire,
    Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum,
    For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age,
    Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
    Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,
    That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
    That makes these odds all even.
  PROVOST. Who's there? Come in; the wish deserves a welcome.
  DUKE. Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be conceal'd.
  CLAUDIO. Now, sister, what's the comfort?
  CLAUDIO. Is there no remedy?
  CLAUDIO. But is there any?
  ISABELLA. Yes, brother, you may live:
    There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
    Though all the world's vastidity you had,
  CLAUDIO. Let me know the point.
  ISABELLA. O, I do fear thee, Claudio; and I quake,
    And the poor beetle that we tread upon
  ISABELLA. There spake my brother; there my father's grave
    As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil;
  ISABELLA. O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell
  ISABELLA. Yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence,
    So to offend him still. This night's the time
    That thus can make him bite the law by th' nose
    Or of the deadly seven it is the least.
  ISABELLA. Which is the least?
    Why would he for the momentary trick
  ISABELLA. What says my brother?
    A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
    To bathe in fiery floods or to reside
    To be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
    The weariest and most loathed worldly life
    What sin you do to save a brother's life,
    Nature dispenses with the deed so far
    Heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair!
    Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
    No word to save thee.
    Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd;
    some speech with you; the satisfaction I would require is
    of other affairs; but I will attend you awhile.
    sister. Angelo had never the purpose to corrupt her; only he hath
    made an assay of her virtue to practise his judgment with the
    disposition of natures. She, having the truth of honour in her,
    therefore prepare yourself to death. Do not satisfy your
  DUKE. Hold you there. Farewell. [Exit CLAUDIO] Provost, a word with
  PROVOST. What's your will, father?
    with the maid; my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch
  DUKE. The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good; the
    but grace, being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body
    will you do to content this substitute, and to save your brother?
  ISABELLA. I am now going to resolve him; I had rather my brother
    die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born. But, O, how
    much is the good Duke deceiv'd in Angelo! If ever he return, and
  DUKE. That shall not be much amiss; yet, as the matter now stands,
    Therefore fasten your ear on my advisings; to the love I have in
    benefit; redeem your brother from the angry law; do no stain to
    your own gracious person; and much please the absent Duke, if
  ISABELLA. Let me hear you speak farther; I have spirit to do
    anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
    heard speak of Mariana, the sister of Frederick, the great
  ISABELLA. I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her
    oath, and the nuptial appointed; between which time of the
    contract and limit of the solemnity her brother Frederick was
    wreck'd at sea, having in that perished vessel the dowry of his
    sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the poor gentlewoman:
    there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love toward
    her ever most kind and natural; with him the portion and sinew of
  DUKE. Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his
    washed with them, but relents not.
    the world! What corruption in this life that it will let this man
  DUKE. It is a rupture that you may easily heal; and the cure of it
    not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in
  ISABELLA. Show me how, good father.
  DUKE. This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her
    have quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current,
    the point; only refer yourself to this advantage: first, that
    your stay with him may not be long; that the time may have all
    shadow and silence in it; and the place answer to convenience.
    place. If the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter, it may
    compel him to her recompense; and here, by this, is your brother
    saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana advantaged, and
    the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid will I frame and make fit for
    his attempt. If you think well to carry this as you may, the
    doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof. What
    promise of satisfaction. I will presently to Saint Luke's; there,
    at the moated grange, resides this dejected Mariana. At that
  ISABELLA. I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.
The street before the prison
Enter, on one side, DUKE disguised as before; on the other, ELBOW,
  ELBOW. Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs
    buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the
  POMPEY. 'Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the merriest
    was put down, and the worser allow'd by order of law a furr'd
    signify that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the
  ELBOW. Come your way, sir. Bless you, good father friar.
  DUKE. And you, good brother father. What offence hath this man made
  ELBOW. Marry, sir, he hath offended the law; and, sir, we take him
    strange picklock, which we have sent to the deputy.
    What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
    'From their abominable and beastly touches
  DUKE. Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
  ELBOW. He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning.
  LUCIO. How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of Caesar? Art
    thou led in triumph? What, is there none of Pygmalion's images,
    newly made woman, to be had now for putting the hand in the
    last rain, ha? What say'st thou, trot? Is the world as it was,
    man? Which is the way? Is it sad, and few words? or how? The
    herself in the tub.
  LUCIO. Why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be so; ever
  LUCIO. Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell; go, say I sent thee
    thither. For debt, Pompey- or how?
  LUCIO. Well, then, imprison him. If imprisonment be the due of a
    the prison, Pompey. You will turn good husband now, Pompey; you
    will keep the house.
  LUCIO. No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear. I will
    patiently, why, your mettle is the more. Adieu trusty Pompey.
  POMPEY. You will not bail me then, sir?
    What news, friar, of the Duke?
  LUCIO. Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other some, he is
  LUCIO. It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the
    state and usurp the beggary he was never born to. Lord Angelo
  LUCIO. Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is
  DUKE. How should he be made, then?
  LUCIO. Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion
    of a codpiece to take away the life of a man! Would the Duke that
    is absent have done this? Ere he would have hang'd a man for the
    getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing a
    thousand. He had some feeling of the sport; he knew the service,
  DUKE. I never heard the absent Duke much detected for women; he was
  LUCIO. Who- not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty; and his use
  LUCIO. Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the Duke; and
    I believe I know the cause of his withdrawing.
  DUKE. What, I prithee, might be the cause?
  LUCIO. No, pardon; 'tis a secret must be lock'd within the teeth
    and the lips; but this I can let you understand: the greater file
    of the subject held the Duke to be wise.
  DUKE. Either this is envy in you, folly, or mistaking; the very
    stream of his life, and the business he hath helmed, must, upon a
    the envious a scholar, a statesman, and a soldier. Therefore you
    But, if ever the Duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me
  LUCIO. Sir, my name is Lucio, well known to the Duke.
  DUKE. O, you hope the Duke will return no more; or you imagine me
  LUCIO. Why? For filling a bottle with a tun-dish. I would the Duke
    unpeople the province with continency; sparrows must not build in
    his house-eaves because they are lecherous. The Duke yet would
    have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to
    for untrussing. Farewell, good friar; I prithee pray for me. The
    Duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on Fridays. He's not
    past it yet; and, I say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar
    Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
  ESCALUS. Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the
    same kind! This would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.
    Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the Duke's time;
    OFFICERS with MISTRESS OVERDONE]  Provost, my brother Angelo will
    with divines, and have all charitable preparation. If my brother
  ESCALUS. Good even, good father.
    To use it for my time. I am a brother
    Of gracious order, late come from the See
  DUKE. None, but that there is so great a fever on goodness that the
    to make fellowships accurst. Much upon this riddle runs the
    wisdom of the world. This news is old enough, yet it is every
    day's news. I pray you, sir, of what disposition was the Duke?
  ESCALUS. One that, above all other strifes, contended especially to
  ESCALUS. Rather rejoicing to see another merry than merry at
    temperance. But leave we him to his events, with a prayer they
    judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of
    justice. Yet had he framed to himself, by the instruction of his
  ESCALUS. You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner
    the very debt of your calling. I have labour'd for the poor
    gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty; but my brother
  DUKE. If his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding, it
  ESCALUS. I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.
         He who the sword of heaven will bear
         More nor less to others paying
         Though angel on the outward side!
         Make a practice on the times,
         His old betrothed but despised;
           And those eyes, the break of day,
             Lights that do mislead the morn;
  MARIANA. Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away;
    What is the news from this good deputy?
    This other doth command a little door
    Which from the vineyard to the garden leads.
    Upon the heavy middle of the night
  DUKE. Are there no other tokens
    I come about my brother.
  ISABELLA. I do desire the like.
  DUKE. Take, then, this your companion by the hand,
    Are stuck upon thee. Volumes of report
    Run with these false, and most contrarious quest
    Make thee the father of their idle dream,
    And rack thee in their fancies.
  ISABELLA. She'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
    'Remember now my brother.'
    To bring you thus together 'tis no sin,
    Sith that the justice of your title to him
    Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go;
    Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.       Exeunt
  PROVOST. Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man's head?
  POMPEY. If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a
  PROVOST. What ho, Abhorson! Where's Abhorson there?
    execution. If you think it meet, compound with him by the year,
    and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the present,
  PROVOST. Go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turn the
    prove my occupation a mystery; but what mystery there should be
  ABHORSON. Come on, bawd; I will instruct thee in my trade; follow.
  PROVOST. Call hither Barnardine and Claudio.
    Th' one has my pity; not a jot the other,
    Being a murderer, though he were my brother.
    Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death;
    When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones.
    For the most gentle Claudio.
    Welcome, father.
  DUKE. The best and wholesom'st spirits of the night
  PROVOST. None, since the curfew rung.
  DUKE. They will then, ere't be long.
    Even with the stroke and line of his great justice;
    To qualify in others. Were he meal'd with that
    Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous;
    But this being so, he's just. [Knocking within] Now are they
    The steeled gaoler is the friend of men. [Knocking within]
    That wounds th' unsisting postern with these strokes.
  PROVOST. There he must stay until the officer
  DUKE. As near the dawning, Provost, as it is,
    You something know; yet I believe there comes
    Besides, upon the very siege of justice,
    Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
    Profess'd the contrary.
  MESSENGER. My lord hath sent you this note; and by me this further
    charge, that you swerve not from the smallest article of it,
    neither in time, matter, or other circumstance. Good morrow; for
    For which the pardoner himself is in;
    That for the fault's love is th' offender friended.
  PROVOST. [Reads] 'Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let
    Claudio be executed by four of the clock, and, in the afternoon,
  DUKE. How came it that the absent Duke had not either deliver'd him
    his fact, till now in the government of Lord Angelo, came not to
  PROVOST. He will hear none. He hath evermore had the liberty of the
    beguiles me; but in the boldness of my cunning I will lay myself
    greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath sentenc'd him. To
    days' respite; for the which you are to do me both a present and
  DUKE. In the delaying death.
  PROVOST. Alack! How may I do it, having the hour limited, and an
    express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view
    of Angelo? I may make my case as Claudio's, to cross this in the
  DUKE. By the vow of mine order, I warrant you, if my instructions
  PROVOST. Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.
    the head and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the
    penitent to be so bar'd before his death. You know the course is
    good fortune, by the saint whom I profess, I will plead against
  PROVOST. Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.
  DUKE. Were you sworn to the Duke, or to the deputy?
  DUKE. You will think you have made no offence if the Duke avouch
    the justice of your dealing?
    fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion, can
    with ease attempt you, I will go further than I meant, to pluck
    all fears out of you. Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of
    the Duke. You know the character, I doubt not; and the signet is
  PROVOST. I know them both.
  DUKE. The contents of this is the return of the Duke; you shall
    these two days he will be here. This is a thing that Angelo knows
    perchance of the Duke's death, perchance entering into some
    unfolding star calls up the shepherd. Put not yourself into
    amazement how these things should be: all difficulties are but
    easy when they are known. Call your executioner, and off with
    marks ready money. Marry, then ginger was not much in request,
    for the old women were all dead. Then is there here one Master
    Caper, at the suit of Master Threepile the mercer, for some four
    Master Copperspur, and Master Starvelackey, the rapier and dagger
    Forthlight the tilter, and brave Master Shootie the great
    forty more- all great doers in our trade, and are now 'for the
  ABHORSON. Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.
    there? What are you?
  POMPEY. Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so good, sir,
  ABHORSON. Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?
  BARNARDINE. How now, Abhorson, what's the news with you?
    for, look you, the warrant's come.
  POMPEY. O, the better, sir! For he that drinks all night and is
    hanged betimes in the morning may sleep the sounder all the next
  ABHORSON. Look you, sir, here comes your ghostly father.
    I will have more time to prepare me, or they shall beat out my
  DUKE. O, Sir, you must; and therefore I beseech you
    Look forward on the journey you shall go.
    my ward; for thence will not I to-day.                  Exit
    After him, fellows; bring him to the block.
  PROVOST. Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
    And to transport him in the mind he is
  PROVOST. Here in the prison, father,
    And satisfy the deputy with the visage
    Dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
  PROVOST. This shall be done, good father, presently.
    To save me from the danger that might come
    Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio.
    Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
    To the under generation, you shall find
  DUKE. Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.
    The Provost, he shall bear them- whose contents
    To meet me at the consecrated fount,
    A league below the city; and from thence,
  PROVOST. Here is the head; I'll carry it myself.
    If yet her brother's pardon be come hither;
    Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
  DUKE. He hath releas'd him, Isabel, from the world.
  DUKE. It is no other.
    Forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.
    Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
    There to give up their pow'r. If you can, pace your wisdom
    Grace of the Duke, revenges to your heart,
  DUKE. This letter, then, to Friar Peter give;
    'Tis that he sent me of the Duke's return.
    Before the Duke; and to the head of Angelo
    Command these fretting waters from your eyes
  LUCIO. Good even. Friar, where's the Provost?
    fruitful meal would set me to't. But they say the Duke will be
    here to-morrow. By my troth, Isabel, I lov'd thy brother. If the
  DUKE. Sir, the Duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports;
    but the best is, he lives not in them.
  LUCIO. Friar, thou knowest not the Duke so well as I do; he's a
  LUCIO. Nay, tarry; I'll go along with thee; I can tell thee pretty
    tales of the Duke.
  DUKE. You have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be
  LUCIO. Yes, marry, did I; but I was fain to forswear it: they would
    else have married me to the rotten medlar.
  LUCIO. By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end. If bawdy
  ESCALUS. Every letter he hath writ hath disvouch'd other.
    meet him at the gates, and redeliver our authorities there?
    ent'ring that, if any crave redress of injustice, they should
    exhibit their petitions in the street?
    shall then have no power to stand against us.
    But it confounds the breather. He should have liv'd,
    Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge,
Fields without the town
    And tell him where I stay; give the like notice
    And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate;
  DUKE. I thank thee, Varrius; thou hast made good haste.
    Come, we will walk. There's other of our friends
A street near the city gate
    I would say the truth; but to accuse him so,
    He speak against me on the adverse side,
  ISABELLA. O, peace! the friar is come.
    Where you may have such vantage on the Duke
    He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded;
    Have hent the gates, and very near upon
    The Duke is ent'ring; therefore, hence, away.         Exeunt
    To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,
    A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time
    And let the subject see, to make them know
    You must walk by us on our other hand,
    By throwing it on any other object
    You bid me seek redemption of the devil!
    Must either punish me, not being believ'd,
    She hath been a suitor to me for her brother,
  ISABELLA. O Prince! I conjure thee, as thou believ'st
    There is another comfort than this world,
    But one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground,
    If she be mad, as I believe no other,
    Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
    To make the truth appear where it seems hid,
    And hide the false seems true.
  ISABELLA. I am the sister of one Claudio,
    Condemn'd upon the act of fornication
    Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio
    As then the messenger-
    For her poor brother's pardon.
  DUKE. I wish you now, then;
    A business for yourself, pray heaven you then
  DUKE. It may be right; but you are i' the wrong
    The phrase is to the matter.
  ISABELLA. In brief- to set the needless process by,
    For this was of much length- the vile conclusion
    Release my brother; and, after much debatement,
    And I did yield to him. But the next morn betimes,
    For my poor brother's head.
    He would have weigh'd thy brother by himself,
    Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
    Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up
    Who knew of your intent and coming hither?
  DUKE. A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?
    I do not like the man; had he been lay, my lord,
    I saw them at the prison; a saucy friar,
    Being come to knowledge that there was complaint
    Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo- came I hither
    O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
    Is this the witness, friar?
  DUKE. A widow, then?
  MARIANA. Neither, my lord.
  DUKE. Why, you are nothing then; neither maid, widow, nor wife.
  LUCIO. My lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither
  LUCIO. He was drunk, then, my lord; it can be no better.
  DUKE. For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
    Which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on;
    This is the hand which, with a vow'd contract,
    Was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body
    That took away the match from Isabel,
    And did supply thee at thy garden-house
    And five years since there was some speech of marriage
    As there comes light from heaven and words from breath,
    As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
    Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice;
    That sets them on. Let me have way, my lord,
    And punish them to your height of pleasure.
    Though they would swear down each particular saint,
    There is another friar that set them on;
    Hath set the women on to this complaint.
    Your provost knows the place where he abides,
    Upon these slanderers.
    clothes; and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of the
    enforce them against him. We shall find this friar a notable
       Re-enter OFFICERS with ISABELLA; and PROVOST with the
  LUCIO. That's the way; for women are light at midnight.
  LUCIO. My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of, here with the
  ESCALUS. Come, sir; did you set these women on to slander Lord
  DUKE. Respect to your great place! and let the devil
    Where is the Duke? 'Tis he should hear me speak.
    Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox,
    Good night to your redress! Is the Duke gone?
    And put your trial in the villain's mouth
  LUCIO. This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.
    Is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women
    And in the witness of his proper ear,
    To call him villain; and then to glance from him
  DUKE. Be not so hot; the Duke
    Till it o'errun the stew: laws for all faults,
    But faults so countenanc'd that the strong statutes
    Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
    Is this the man that you did tell us of?
  LUCIO. 'Tis he, my lord. Come hither, good-man bald-pate.
  DUKE. I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice. I met you at
    the prison, in the absence of the Duke.
  LUCIO. O did you so? And do you remember what you said of the Duke?
  LUCIO. Do you so, sir? And was the Duke a fleshmonger, a fool, and
    a coward, as you then reported him to be?
  LUCIO. O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the nose for
  DUKE. I protest I love the Duke as I love myself.
  ANGELO. Hark how the villain would close now, after his treasonable
    prison! Where is the Provost? Away with him to prison! Lay bolts
    too, and with the other confederate companion!
                            [The PROVOST lays bands on the DUKE]
             [Pulls off the FRIAR'S bood and discovers the DUKE]
  DUKE. Thou art the first knave that e'er mad'st a duke.
    First, Provost, let me bail these gentle three.
    [To Lucio] Sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you
    That yet can do thee office? If thou hast,
    Immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
    Is all the grace I beg.
  DUKE. Come hither, Mariana.
    Do you the office, friar; which consummate,
    Than at the strangeness of it.
  DUKE. Come hither, Isabel.
    Your friar is now your prince. As I was then
    Your brother's death, I know, sits at your heart;
    Labouring to save his life, and would not rather
    It was the swift celerity of his death,
    So happy is your brother.
    For Mariana's sake; but as he adjudg'd your brother-
    Thereon dependent, for your brother's life-
    The very mercy of the law cries out
    Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
    We do condemn thee to the very block
    Consenting to the safeguard of your honour,
    Although by confiscation they are ours,
    I crave no other, nor no better man.
    Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
    And, for the most, become much more the better
    As if my brother liv'd. I partly think
    Let him not die. My brother had but justice,
    In that he did the thing for which he died;
    That perish'd by the way. Thoughts are no subjects;
    I have bethought me of another fault.
  DUKE. Had you a special warrant for the deed?
    For testimony whereof, one in the prison,
    Go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.      Exit PROVOST
    Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
    That apprehends no further than this world,
    But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all,
    And pray thee take this mercy to provide
  PROVOST. This is another prisoner that I sav'd,
  DUKE. [To ISABELLA] If he be like your brother, for his sake
    He is my brother too. But fitter time for that.
  LUCIO. Faith, my lord, I spoke it but according to the trick.
    If you will hang me for it, you may; but I had rather it would
    Proclaim it, Provost, round about the city,
    As I have heard him swear himself there's one
    Thy slanders I forgive; and therewithal
    Remit thy other forfeits. Take him to prison;
    We shall employ thee in a worthier place.
  OLD GOBBO, father to Launcelot
  Magnificoes of Venice, Officers of the Court of Justice,
    Gaoler, Servants, and other Attendants
  SALERIO. Your mind is tossing on the ocean;
    Like signiors and rich burghers on the flood,
    Or as it were the pageants of the sea-
    Do overpeer the petty traffickers,
    That curtsy to them, do them reverence,
    As they fly by them with their woven wings.
    Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
    I should not see the sandy hour-glass run
    And see the holy edifice of stone,
    Would scatter all her spices on the stream,
    Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks,
    And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought
    To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
    Upon the fortune of this present year;
  SOLANIO. Why then you are in love.
  SOLANIO. Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad
    Some that will evermore peep through their eyes,
    And other of such vinegar aspect
    That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile
    Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.
    You have too much respect upon the world;
  ANTONIO. I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano-
  GRATIANO. Let me play the fool.
    And let my liver rather heat with wine
    Sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice
    By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio-
    I love thee, and 'tis my love that speaks-
    O my Antonio, I do know of these
    That therefore only are reputed wise
    If they should speak, would almost damn those ears
    Which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools.
    I'll tell thee more of this another time.
  LORENZO. Well, we will leave you then till dinner-time.
    I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
    Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.
    them, and when you have them they are not worth the search.
  ANTONIO. Well; tell me now what lady is the same
    Is to come fairly off from the great debts
    I owe the most, in money and in love;
    How to get clear of all the debts I owe.
    Within the eye of honour, be assur'd
    I shot his fellow of the self-same flight
    To find the other forth; and by adventuring both
    To shoot another arrow that self way
    Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
    As I will watch the aim, or to find both,
    And thankfully rest debtor for the first.
    And I am prest unto it; therefore, speak.
    Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth;
    For the four winds blow in from every coast
    O my Antonio, had I but the means
    To hold a rival place with one of them,
    Neither have I money nor commodity
    To raise a present sum; therefore go forth,
    That shall be rack'd, even to the uttermost,
    To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
  NERISSA. You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in the
    see, they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that
    starve with nothing. It is no mean happiness, therefore, to be
    seated in the mean: superfluity come sooner by white hairs, but
    of the twenty to follow mine own teaching. The brain may devise
    laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree;
    such a hare is madness the youth, to skip o'er the meshes of good
    counsel the cripple. But this reasoning is not in the fashion to
    choose me a husband. O me, the word 'choose'! I may neither
    choose who I would nor refuse who I dislike; so is the will of a
    living daughter curb'd by the will of a dead father. Is it not
  NERISSA. Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death
    have good inspirations; therefore the lott'ry that he hath
    devised in these three chests, of gold, silver, and lead- whereof
    what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these
  PORTIA. I pray thee over-name them; and as thou namest them, I will
    describe them; and according to my description, level at my
  NERISSA. First, there is the Neapolitan prince.
    mother play'd false with a smith.
  NERISSA. Then is there the County Palatine.
    he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so
    full of unmannerly sadness in his youth. I had rather be married
    to a death's-head with a bone in his mouth than to either of
    these. God defend me from these two!
  NERISSA. How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le Bon?
  PORTIA. God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man. In
    horse better than the Neapolitan's, a better bad habit of
    frowning than the Count Palatine; he is every man in no man. If a
  NERISSA. What say you then to Falconbridge, the young baron of
    nor I him: he hath neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you
    will come into the court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth
    in the English. He is a proper man's picture; but alas, who can
  NERISSA. What think you of the Scottish lord, his neighbour?
    a box of the ear of the Englishman, and swore he would pay him
    again when he was able; I think the Frenchman became his surety,
    and seal'd under for another.
  NERISSA. How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxony's
  PORTIA. Very vilely in the morning when he is sober; and most
    vilely in the afternoon when he is drunk. When he is best, he is
    better than a beast. An the worst fall that ever fell, I hope I
  NERISSA. If he should offer to choose, and choose the right casket,
    you should refuse to perform your father's will, if you should
  PORTIA. Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee set a deep
    glass of Rhenish wine on the contrary casket; for if the devil be
  NERISSA. You need not fear, lady, the having any of these lords;
    they have acquainted me with their determinations, which is
    indeed to return to their home, and to trouble you with no more
    suit, unless you may be won by some other sort than your father's
    imposition, depending on the caskets.
    Diana, unless I be obtained by the manner of my father's will. I
    am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable; for there is not
    one among them but I dote on his very absence, and I pray God
    grant them a fair departure.
  NERISSA. Do you not remember, lady, in your father's time, a
    Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither in company of
    the Marquis of Montferrat?
  NERISSA. True, madam; he, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes
    look'd upon, was the best deserving a fair lady.
  SERVINGMAN. The four strangers seek for you, madam, to take their
    leave; and there is a forerunner come from a fifth, the Prince of
    Morocco, who brings word the Prince his master will be here
  PORTIA. If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good heart as I
    can bid the other four farewell, I should be glad of his
    approach; if he have the condition of a saint and the complexion
    of a devil, I had rather he should shrive me than wive me.
    Whiles we shut the gate upon one wooer, another knocks at the
Enter BASSANIO With SHYLOCK the Jew
  BASSANIO. For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall be bound.
  BASSANIO. Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?
    are in supposition: he hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another
    to the Indies; I understand, moreover, upon the Rialto, he hath a
    third at Mexico, a fourth for England- and other ventures he
    men; there be land-rats and water-rats, water-thieves and
    land-thieves- I mean pirates; and then there is the peril of
  SHYLOCK. Yes, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your
    prophet, the Nazarite, conjured the devil into! I will buy with
    with you. What news on the Rialto? Who is he comes here?
    If I can catch him once upon the hip,
    I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
    Even there where merchants most do congregate,
    And, by the near guess of my memory,
    I cannot instantly raise up the gross
    Your worship was the last man in our mouths.
  ANTONIO. Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
    Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
    Well then, your bond; and, let me see- but hear you,
    Methoughts you said you neither lend nor borrow
    As his wise mother wrought in his behalf,
    The third possessor; ay, he was the third-
    That all the eanlings which were streak'd and pied
    Should fall as Jacob's hire, the ewes, being rank,
    In end of autumn turned to the rams;
    And when the work of generation was
    Between these woolly breeders in the act,
    And, in the doing of the deed of kind,
    He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes,
    Who, then conceiving, did in eaning time
    But sway'd and fashion'd by the hand of heaven.
    A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
    Three months from twelve; then let me see, the rate-
    In the Rialto you have rated me
    For suff'rance is the badge of all our tribe;
    Well then, it now appears you need my help;
    Go to, then; you come to me, and you say
    You spurn'd me such a day; another time
    You call'd me dog; and for these courtesies
  ANTONIO. I am as like to call thee so again,
    To spit on thee again, to spurn thee too.
    But lend it rather to thine enemy,
    Exact the penalty.
    Forget the shames that you have stain'd me with,
    Go with me to a notary, seal me there
    Express'd in the condition, let the forfeit
    And say there is much kindness in the Jew.
    I'll rather dwell in my necessity.
    Within these two months- that's a month before
    Of thrice three times the value of this bond.
  SHYLOCK. O father Abram, what these Christians are,
    Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
    The thoughts of others! Pray you, tell me this:
    By the exaction of the forfeiture?
    Is not so estimable, profitable neither,
  SHYLOCK. Then meet me forthwith at the notary's;
    And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
    See to my house, left in the fearful guard
  ANTONIO. Hie thee, gentle Jew.                    Exit SHYLOCK
  ANTONIO. Come on; in this there can be no dismay;
    My ships come home a month before the day.            Exeunt
Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE of MOROCCO, a tawny Moor all in white,
    The shadowed livery of the burnish'd sun,
    Bring me the fairest creature northward born,
    Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles,
    I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine
    Hath fear'd the valiant; by my love, I swear
    Besides, the lott'ry of my destiny
    Bars me the right of voluntary choosing.
    But, if my father had not scanted me,
    Yourself, renowned Prince, then stood as fair
    Therefore, I pray you, lead me to the caskets
    That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince,
    I would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look,
    Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth,
    Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear,
    Yea, mock the lion when 'a roars for prey,
    To win thee, lady. But, alas the while!
    Which is the better man, the greater throw
    May turn by fortune from the weaker band.
    And either not attempt to choose at all,
    In way of marriage; therefore be advis'd.
  PORTIA. First, forward to the temple. After dinner
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. Good fortune then,
    'good Launcelot Gobbo, use your legs, take the start, run away.'
    run; scorn running with thy heels.' Well, the most courageous
    fiend bids me pack. 'Via!' says the fiend; 'away!' says the
    fiend. 'For the heavens, rouse up a brave mind' says the fiend
    'and run.' Well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my
    an honest man's son' or rather 'an honest woman's son'; for
    indeed my father did something smack, something grow to, he had a
    'Budge,' says the fiend. 'Budge not,' says my conscience.
    the Jew my master, who- God bless the mark!- is a kind of devil;
    and, to run away from the Jew, I should be ruled by the fiend,
    who- saving your reverence!- is the devil himself. Certainly the
    Jew is the very devil incarnation; and, in my conscience, my
    me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives the more friendly
  GOBBO. Master young man, you, I pray you, which is the way to
  LAUNCELOT.  [Aside]  O heavens! This is my true-begotten father,
  GOBBO. Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is the way to
  LAUNCELOT. Turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but, at
    the next turning of all, on your left; marry, at the very next
    turning, turn of no hand, but turn down indirectly to the Jew's
    me whether one Launcelot, that dwells with him, dwell with him or
    now; now will I raise the waters.- Talk you of young Master
  GOBBO. No master, sir, but a poor man's son; his father, though I
  LAUNCELOT. Well, let his father be what 'a will, we talk of young
    father; for the young gentleman, according to Fates and Destinies
    and such odd sayings, the Sisters Three and such branches of
  GOBBO. Marry, God forbid! The boy was the very staff of my age, my
    prop? Do you know me, father?
  GOBBO. Alack the day, I know you not, young gentleman; but I pray
  LAUNCELOT. Do you not know me, father?
  LAUNCELOT. Nay, indeed, if you had your eyes, you might fail of the
    knowing me: it is a wise father that knows his own child. Well,
    may, but in the end truth will out.
    Launcelot, the Jew's man, and I am sure Margery your wife is my
    mother.
  LAUNCELOT. It should seem, then, that Dobbin's tail grows backward;
    my ribs. Father, I am glad you are come; give me your present to
    fortune! Here comes the man. To him, father, for I am a Jew, if I
    serve the Jew any longer.
    ready at the farthest by five of the clock. See these letters
    delivered, put the liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to
  LAUNCELOT. To him, father.
  LAUNCELOT. Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew's man, that would,
    sir, as my father shall specify-
  LAUNCELOT. Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew, and
    have a desire, as my father shall specify-
  LAUNCELOT. To be brief, the very truth is that the Jew, having done
    me wrong, doth cause me, as my father, being I hope an old man,
  LAUNCELOT. In very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as
    it, though old man, yet poor man, my father.
  GOBBO. That is the very defect of the matter, sir.
  BASSANIO. I know thee well; thou hast obtain'd thy suit.
    And hath preferr'd thee, if it be preferment
    Shylock and you, sir: you have the grace of God, sir, and he hath
  BASSANIO. Thou speak'st it well. Go, father, with thy son.
  LAUNCELOT. Father, in. I cannot get a service, no! I have ne'er a
    And then to scape drowning thrice, and to be in peril of my life
    with the edge of a feather-bed-here are simple scapes. Well, if
    Fortune be a woman, she's a good wench for this gear. Father,
    come; I'll take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling.
  BASSANIO. I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this.
    My best esteem'd acquaintance; hie thee, go.
  BASSANIO. Why, then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano:
    Parts that become thee happily enough,
    But where thou art not known, why there they show
    Something too liberal. Pray thee, take pain
    I be misconst'red in the place I go to
    Talk with respect, and swear but now and then,
    Use all the observance of civility
    I would entreat you rather to put on
  GRATIANO. And I must to Lorenzo and the rest;
  JESSICA. I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so.
    But fare thee well; there is a ducat for thee;
    And so farewell. I would not have my father
    See me in talk with thee.
    most sweet Jew! If a Christian do not play the knave and get
    thee, I am much deceived. But, adieu! these foolish drops do
    To be asham'd to be my father's child!
    Friend Launcelot, what's the news?
  LORENZO. I know the hand; in faith, 'tis a fair hand,
    And whiter than the paper it writ on
    Is the fair hand that writ.
  LORENZO. Whither goest thou?
  LAUNCELOT. Marry, sir, to bid my old master, the Jew, to sup
    to-night with my new master, the Christian.
  LORENZO. I must needs tell thee all. She hath directed
    How I shall take her from her father's house;
    If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven,
  SHYLOCK. Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.
    I am not bid for love; they flatter me;
  LAUNCELOT. And they have conspired together; I will not say you
    shall see a masque, but if you do, then it was not for nothing
  SHYLOCK. What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica:
    Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum,
    And the vile squealing of the wry-neck'd fife,
    Clamber not you up to the casements then,
    Nor thrust your head into the public street
    Let not the sound of shallow fopp'ry enter
    More than the wild-cat; drones hive not with me,
    I have a father, you a daughter, lost.                  Exit
Enter the maskers, GRATIANO and SALERIO
  GRATIANO. This is the pent-house under which Lorenzo
    For lovers ever run before the clock.
    To seal love's bonds new made than they are wont
    Where is the horse that doth untread again
    His tedious measures with the unbated fire
    That he did pace them first? All things that are
    Hugg'd and embraced by the strumpet wind;
    How like the prodigal doth she return,
    With over-weather'd ribs and ragged sails,
    Lean, rent, and beggar'd by the strumpet wind!
    When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,
    I'll watch as long for you then. Approach;
    Here dwells my father Jew. Ho! who's within?
           Enter JESSICA, above, in boy's clothes
    But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours?
  JESSICA. Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains.
    The pretty follies that themselves commit,
    For, if they could, Cupid himself would blush
    They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light.
    Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.
    For the close night doth play the runaway,
  JESSICA. I will make fast the doors, and gild myself
    And therefore, like herself, wise, fair, and true,
  ANTONIO. Who's there?
  ANTONIO. Fie, fie, Gratiano, where are all the rest?
    No masque to-night; the wind is come about;
Flourish of cornets. Enter PORTIA, with the PRINCE OF MOROCCO,
and their trains
  PORTIA. Go draw aside the curtains and discover
    How shall I know if I do choose the right?
  PORTIA. The one of them contains my picture, Prince;
    If you choose that, then I am yours withal.
    I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead.
    What says the silver with her virgin hue?
    As much as he deserves! Pause there, Morocco,
    May not extend so far as to the lady;
    As much as I deserve? Why, that's the lady!
    But more than these, in love I do deserve.
    What if I stray'd no farther, but chose here?
    Why, that's the lady! All the world desires her;
    From the four corners of the earth they come
    The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds
    Spits in the face of heaven, is no bar
    To stop the foreign spirits, but they come
    One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
    To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave.
    A coin that bears the figure of an angel
    Lies all within. Deliver me the key;
  PORTIA. There, take it, Prince, and if my form lie there,
    Then I am yours.                [He opens the golden casket]
    There is a written scroll! I'll read the writing.
  PORTIA. A gentle riddance. Draw the curtains, go.
    And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.
  SOLANIO. The villain Jew with outcries rais'd the Duke,
  SALERIO. He came too late, the ship was under sail;
    But there the Duke was given to understand
    That in a gondola were seen together
    Besides, Antonio certified the Duke
    As the dog Jew did utter in the streets.
    Justice! the law! My ducats and my daughter!
    Stol'n by my daughter! Justice! Find the girl;
    She hath the stones upon her and the ducats.'
  SALERIO. Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,
    Who told me, in the narrow seas that part
    The French and English, there miscarried
  SALERIO. A kinder gentleman treads not the earth.
    But stay the very riping of the time;
    And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me,
    As shall conveniently become you there.'
    And even there, his eye being big with tears,
    He wrung Bassanio's hand; and so they parted.
  SOLANIO. I think he only loves the world for him.
    I pray thee, let us go and find him out,
    With some delight or other.
  NERISSA. Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight;
       Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE OF ARRAGON,
                    PORTIA, and their trains
  PORTIA. Behold, there stand the caskets, noble Prince.
    Of the right casket, never in my life
  PORTIA. To these injunctions every one doth swear
    What says the golden chest? Ha! let me see:
    By the fool multitude, that choose by show,
    Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach;
    Which pries not to th' interior, but, like the martlet,
    Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
    Even in the force and road of casualty.
    And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
    Why, then to thee, thou silver treasure-house!
    Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume
    Were purchas'd by the merit of the wearer!
    How many then should cover that stand bare!
    How much low peasantry would then be gleaned
    From the true seed of honour! and how much honour
    Pick'd from the chaff and ruin of the times,
                                    [He opens the silver casket]
  PORTIA.  [Aside]  Too long a pause for that which you find there.
         Some there be that shadows kiss,
         By the time I linger here.
  PORTIA. Thus hath the candle sing'd the moth.
    O, these deliberate fools! When they do choose,
    They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.
  PORTIA. Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.
  SERVANT. Madam, there is alighted at your gate
  PORTIA. No more, I pray thee; I am half afeard
    Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee,
  SOLANIO. Now, what news on the Rialto?
  SALERIO. Why, yet it lives there uncheck'd that Antonio hath a ship
    of rich lading wreck'd on the narrow seas; the Goodwins I think
    they call the place, a very dangerous flat and fatal, where the
    carcases of many a tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my
    ginger or made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a
    crossing the plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the
  SALERIO. Come, the full stop.
  SOLANIO. Ha! What sayest thou? Why, the end is, he hath lost a
  SALERIO. I would it might prove the end of his losses.
  SOLANIO. Let me say amen betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer,
    for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew.
    How now, Shylock? What news among the merchants?
  SALERIO. That's certain; I, for my part, knew the tailor that made
    the wings she flew withal.
  SOLANIO. And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was flidge;
    and then it is the complexion of them all to leave the dam.
  SALERIO. That's certain, if the devil may be her judge.
  SOLANIO. Out upon it, old carrion! Rebels it at these years?
    between jet and ivory; more between your bloods than there is
    between red wine and Rhenish. But tell us, do you hear whether
  SHYLOCK. There I have another bad match: a bankrupt, a prodigal,
    who dare scarce show his head on the Rialto; a beggar, that was
    us'd to come so smug upon the mart. Let him look to his bond. He
    passions, fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons,
    subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed
    and cooled by the same winter and summer, as a Christian is? If
    not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you
    I will execute; and itshall go hard but I will better the
  SOLANIO. Here comes another of the tribe; a third cannot be
    match'd, unless the devil himself turn Jew.
  SHYLOCK. Why there, there, there, there! A diamond gone, cost me
    that, and other precious, precious jewels. I would my daughter
    were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her ear; would she were
    hears'd at my foot, and the ducats in her coffin! No news of
    them? Why, so- and I know not what's spent in the search. Why,
    find the thief; and no satisfaction, no revenge; nor no ill luck
  TUBAL. Yes, other men have ill luck too: Antonio, as I heard in
  TUBAL. I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wreck.
  SHYLOCK. I thank thee, good Tubal. Good news, good news- ha, ha!-
  TUBAL. One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter
    officer; bespeak him a fortnight before. I will have the heart of
Enter BASSANIO, PORTIA, GRATIANO, NERISSA, and all their trains
    I lose your company; therefore forbear a while.
    How to choose right, but then I am forsworn;
    One half of me is yours, the other half yours-
    Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours,
    And so all yours. O! these naughty times
    Puts bars between the owners and their rights;
    I speak too long, but 'tis to peize the time,
    For as I am, I live upon the rack.
  PORTIA. Upon the rack, Bassanio? Then confess
    What treason there is mingled with your love.
  PORTIA. Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack,
  BASSANIO. Promise me life, and I'll confess the truth.
  PORTIA. Well then, confess and live.
    Had been the very sum of my confession.
    But let me to my fortune and the caskets.
  PORTIA. Away, then; I am lock'd in one of them.
    Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof;
    Fading in music. That the comparison
    May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
    And what is music then? Then music is
    Even as the flourish when true subjects bow
    That creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear
    To the sea-monster. I stand for sacrifice;
    The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives,
    I view the fight than thou that mak'st the fray.
      the whilst BASSANIO comments on the caskets to himself
                 Or in the heart or in the head,
                 It is engend'red in the eyes,
                 In the cradle where it lies.
  BASSANIO. So may the outward shows be least themselves;
    Obscures the show of evil? In religion,
    Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?
    As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
    And these assume but valour's excrement
    To render them redoubted. Look on beauty
    And you shall see 'tis purchas'd by the weight,
    Which therein works a miracle in nature,
    Making them lightest that wear most of it;
    Which make such wanton gambols with the wind
    To be the dowry of a second head-
    The skull that bred them in the sepulchre.
    Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
    To a most dangerous sea; the beauteous scarf
    To entrap the wisest. Therefore, thou gaudy gold,
    Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee;
    Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge
    Which rather threaten'st than dost promise aught,
    And here choose I. Joy be the consequence!
  PORTIA.  [Aside]  How all the other passions fleet to air,
  BASSANIO.  [Opening the leaden casket]  What find I here?
    Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes?
    Or whether riding on the balls of mine
    Seem they in motion? Here are sever'd lips,
    The painter plays the spider, and hath woven
    A golden mesh t' entrap the hearts of men
    How could he see to do them? Having made one,
    Doth limp behind the substance. Here's the scroll,
         'You that choose not by the view,
    Whether those peals of praise be his or no;
    As doubtful whether what I see be true,
    Exceed account. But the full sum of me
    Is now converted. But now I was the lord
    This house, these servants, and this same myself,
    Are yours- my lord's. I give them with this ring,
    Let it presage the ruin of your love,
    And there is such confusion in my powers
    By a beloved prince, there doth appear
    Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
    Where every something, being blent together,
    Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence;
    O, then be bold to say Bassanio's dead!
    I wish you all the joy that you can wish,
    You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid;
    Your fortune stood upon the caskets there,
    And so did mine too, as the matter falls;
  GRATIANO. We'll play with them: the first boy for a thousand
  BASSANIO. Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither,
    If that the youth of my new int'rest here
    But meeting with Salerio by the way,
    Nor well, unless in mind; his letter there
    Will show you his estate.        [BASSANIO opens the letter]
    Your hand, Salerio. What's the news from Venice?
    We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece.
  SALERIO. I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.
    That steals the colour from Bassanio's cheek:
    Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
    Could turn so much the constitution
    And I must freely have the half of anything
    Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words
    I freely told you all the wealth I had
    And then I told you true. And yet, dear lady,
    My state was nothing, I should then have told you
    The paper as the body of my friend,
    And not one vessel scape the dreadful touch
    The present money to discharge the Jew,
    A creature that did bear the shape of man
    He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
    And doth impeach the freedom of the state,
    If they deny him justice. Twenty merchants,
    The Duke himself, and the magnificoes
    But none can drive him from the envious plea
    That he would rather have Antonio's flesh
    Than twenty times the value of the sum
  BASSANIO. The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
  PORTIA. What sum owes he the Jew?
    Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond;
    Double six thousand, and then treble that,
    And then away to Venice to your friend;
    To pay the petty debt twenty times over.
    But let me hear the letter of your friend.
    my creditors grow cruel, my estate is very low, my bond to the
    This is the fool that lent out money gratis.
  ANTONIO. I pray thee hear me speak.
  SHYLOCK. I'll have my bond. I will not hear thee speak;
    I'll have my bond; and therefore speak no more.
    To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield,
  SOLANIO. It is the most impenetrable cur
  SOLANIO. I am sure the Duke
  ANTONIO. The Duke cannot deny the course of law;
    For the commodity that strangers have
    Will much impeach the justice of the state,
    Since that the trade and profit of the city
    To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.          Exeunt
    In bearing thus the absence of your lord.
    I know you would be prouder of the work
    That do converse and waste the time together,
    Being the bosom lover of my lord,
    How little is the cost I have bestowed
    In purchasing the semblance of my soul
    From out the state of hellish cruelty!
    This comes too near the praising of myself;
    Therefore, no more of it; hear other things.
    And there we will abide. I do desire you
    As I have ever found thee honest-true,
    So let me find thee still. Take this same letter,
    And look what notes and garments he doth give thee,
    Bring them, I pray thee, with imagin'd speed
    Unto the traject, to the common ferry
    But get thee gone; I shall be there before thee.
    Before they think of us.
  NERISSA. Shall they see us?
    That they shall think we are accomplished
    With that we lack. I'll hold thee any wager,
    I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two,
    And wear my dagger with the braver grace,
    And speak between the change of man and boy
    Which I denying, they fell sick and died-
    And wish for all that, that I had not kill'd them.
    And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell,
    A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks,
    But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device
    At the park gate; and therefore haste away,
  LAUNCELOT. Yes, truly; for, look you, the sins of the father are to
    be laid upon the children; therefore, I promise you, I fear you.
    the matter; therefore be o' good cheer, for truly I think you are
    that is but a kind of bastard hope, neither.
  JESSICA. And what hope is that, I pray thee?
  LAUNCELOT. Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not-
   that you are not the Jew's daughter.
  JESSICA. That were a kind of bastard hope indeed; so the sins of my
    mother should be visited upon me.
  LAUNCELOT. Truly then I fear you are damn'd both by father and
    mother; thus when I shun Scylla, your father, I fall into
    Charybdis, your mother; well, you are gone both ways.
  LAUNCELOT. Truly, the more to blame he; we were Christians enow
    before, e'en as many as could well live one by another. This
    making of Christians will raise the price of hogs; if we grow all
    to be pork-eaters, we shall not shortly have a rasher on the
    out; he tells me flatly there's no mercy for me in heaven,
    of the commonwealth, for in converting Jews to Christians you
    raise the price of pork.
  LORENZO. I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you
    can the getting up of the negro's belly; the Moor is with child
  LAUNCELOT. It is much that the Moor should be more than reason; but
  LORENZO. How every fool can play upon the word! I think the best
    commendable in none only but parrots. Go in, sirrah; bid them
  LAUNCELOT. That is done, sir; they have all stomachs.
  LORENZO. Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you! Then bid them
  LAUNCELOT. That is done too, sir, only 'cover' is the word.
  LORENZO. Will you cover, then, sir?
  LAUNCELOT. Not so, sir, neither; I know my duty.
  LORENZO. Yet more quarrelling with occasion! Wilt thou show the
    whole wealth of thy wit in an instant? I pray thee understand a
    plain man in his plain meaning: go to thy fellows, bid them cover
    the table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to dinner.
  LAUNCELOT. For the table, sir, it shall be serv'd in; for the meat,
    Defy the matter. How cheer'st thou, Jessica?
    How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife?
    He finds the joys of heaven here on earth;
    And on the wager lay two earthly women,
    And Portia one, there must be something else
    Pawn'd with the other; for the poor rude world
  LORENZO. No, pray thee, let it serve for table-talk;
    Then howsome'er thou speak'st, 'mong other things
Enter the DUKE, the MAGNIFICOES, ANTONIO, BASSANIO, GRATIANO, SALERIO,
  DUKE OF VENICE. I am sorry for thee; thou art come to answer
  DUKE OF VENICE. Go one, and call the Jew into the court.
  SALERIO. He is ready at the door; he comes, my lord.
    Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,
    To the last hour of act; and then, 'tis thought,
    And where thou now exacts the penalty,
    Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,
    Forgive a moiety of the principal,
    To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
    If you deny it, let the danger light
    You'll ask me why I rather choose to have
    Some men there are love not a gaping pig;
    Some that are mad if they behold a cat;
    And others, when the bagpipe sings i' th' nose,
    Cannot contain their urine; for affection,
    Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood
    Of what it likes or loathes. Now, for your answer:
    As there is no firm reason to be rend'red
    To excuse the current of thy cruelty.
  SHYLOCK. I am not bound to please thee with my answers.
  BASSANIO. Do all men kill the things they do not love?
  SHYLOCK. Hates any man the thing he would not kill?
  SHYLOCK. What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?
  ANTONIO. I pray you, think you question with the Jew.
    You may as well go stand upon the beach
    And bid the main flood bate his usual height;
    You may as well use question with the wolf,
    Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb;
    You may as well forbid the mountain pines
    To wag their high tops and to make no noise
    When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven;
    Make no moe offers, use no farther means,
    Let me have judgment, and the Jew his will.
    I would not draw them; I would have my bond.
    Because you bought them; shall I say to you
    'Let them be free, marry them to your heirs-
    Why sweat they under burdens?- let their beds
    Be made as soft as yours, and let their palates
    There is no force in the decrees of Venice.
    A messenger with letters from the doctor,
  DUKE OF VENICE. Bring us the letters; call the messenger.
  ANTONIO. I am a tainted wether of the flock,
    Meetest for death; the weakest kind of fruit
    Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me.
  SHYLOCK. To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.
    No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness
    Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?
    That souls of animals infuse themselves
    Into the trunks of men. Thy currish spirit
    Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
    Infus'd itself in thee; for thy desires
  SHYLOCK. Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,
    To know your answer, whether you'll admit him.
    Meantime, the court shall hear Bellario's letter.
  CLERK.  [Reads]  'Your Grace shall understand that at the receipt
    of your letter I am very sick; but in the instant that your
    of Rome- his name is Balthazar. I acquainted him with the cause
    in controversy between the Jew and Antonio the merchant; we
    turn'd o'er many books together; he is furnished with my opinion
    which, bettered with his own learning-the greatness whereof I
  DUKE OF VENICE. YOU hear the learn'd Bellario, what he writes;
    And here, I take it, is the doctor come.
    Are you acquainted with the difference
    That holds this present question in the court?
  PORTIA. I am informed throughly of the cause.
    Which is the merchant here, and which the Jew?
  PORTIA. Of a strange nature is the suit you follow;
    Yet in such rule that the Venetian law
  PORTIA. Do you confess the bond?
  PORTIA. Then must the Jew be merciful.
    It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
    Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest:
    'Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
    His sceptre shows the force of temporal power,
    Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;
    It is enthroned in the hearts of kings,
    And earthly power doth then show likest God's
    That in the course of justice none of us
    To mitigate the justice of thy plea,
    Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there.
  SHYLOCK. My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
  BASSANIO. Yes; here I tender it for him in the court;
    Yea, twice the sum; if that will not suffice,
    Wrest once the law to your authority;
  PORTIA. It must not be; there is no power in Venice
    And many an error, by the same example,
    Will rush into the state; it cannot be.
    O wise young judge, how I do honour thee!
  PORTIA. I pray you, let me look upon the bond.
  PORTIA. Shylock, there's thrice thy money off'red thee.
    And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
    Nearest the merchant's heart. Be merciful.
    Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond.
  SHYLOCK. When it is paid according to the tenour.
    You know the law; your exposition
    Hath been most sound; I charge you by the law,
    There is no power in the tongue of man
  ANTONIO. Most heartily I do beseech the court
    To give the judgment.
  PORTIA. Why then, thus it is:
  PORTIA. For the intent and purpose of the law
    Hath full relation to the penalty,
    Which here appeareth due upon the bond.
    So says the bond; doth it not, noble judge?
    'Nearest his heart,' those are the very words.
  PORTIA. It is so. Are there balance here to weigh
  SHYLOCK. I have them ready.
  SHYLOCK. Is it so nominated in the bond?
  SHYLOCK. I cannot find it; 'tis not in the bond.
    To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
    Tell her the process of Antonio's end;
    And, when the tale is told, bid her be judge
    Whether Bassanio had not once a love.
    For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
    But life itself, my wife, and all the world,
    I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all
    If she were by to hear you make the offer.
  SHYLOCK.  [Aside]  These be the Christian husbands! I have a
    Would any of the stock of Barrabas
    Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!-
    We trifle time; I pray thee pursue sentence.
    The court awards it and the law doth give it.
    The law allows it and the court awards it.
  PORTIA. Tarry a little; there is something else.
    This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood:
    Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh;
    But, in the cutting it, if thou dost shed
    Are, by the laws of Venice, confiscate
    Unto the state of Venice.
  SHYLOCK. Is that the law?
  PORTIA. Thyself shalt see the act;
  SHYLOCK. I take this offer then: pay the bond thrice,
    And let the Christian go.
  BASSANIO. Here is the money.
    He shall have nothing but the penalty.
  PORTIA. Therefore, prepare thee to cut off the flesh.
    As makes it light or heavy in the substance,
    Or the division of the twentieth part
    Of one poor scruple; nay, if the scale do turn
    But in the estimation of a hair-
    Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.
  PORTIA. Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.
  BASSANIO. I have it ready for thee; here it is.
  PORTIA. He hath refus'd it in the open court;
    I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.
  PORTIA. Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture
  SHYLOCK. Why, then the devil give him good of it!
    The law hath yet another hold on you.
    It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
    He seek the life of any citizen,
    The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive
    Shall seize one half his goods; the other half
    Comes to the privy coffer of the state;
    And the offender's life lies in the mercy
    Of the Duke only, 'gainst all other voice.
    Thou hast contrived against the very life
    Of the defendant; and thou hast incurr'd
    Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.
    And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
    Thou hast not left the value of a cord;
    Therefore thou must be hang'd at the state's charge.
  DUKE OF VENICE. That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit,
    I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it.
    The other half comes to the general state,
  PORTIA. Ay, for the state; not for Antonio.
    You take my house when you do take the prop
    When you do take the means whereby I live.
  ANTONIO. So please my lord the Duke and all the court
    To quit the fine for one half of his goods;
    The other half in use, to render it
    Upon his death unto the gentleman
    The other, that he do record a gift,
    Here in the court, of all he dies possess'd
    I am not well; send the deed after me
  DUKE OF VENICE. Get thee gone, but do it.
  GRATIANO. In christ'ning shalt thou have two god-fathers;
    To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.
    Three thousand ducats, due unto the Jew,
    And therein do account myself well paid.
  BASSANIO. Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further;
  PORTIA. You press me far, and therefore I will yield.
    [To ANTONIO]  Give me your gloves, I'll wear them for your sake.
  BASSANIO.. There's more depends on this than on the value.
    That I should neither sell, nor give, nor lose it.
  PORTIA. That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts.
  ANTONIO. My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring.
    Give him the ring, and bring him, if thou canst,
    Come, you and I will thither presently;
    And in the morning early will we both
  PORTIA. Inquire the Jew's house out, give him this deed,
    And so, I pray you, tell him. Furthermore,
    That they did give the rings away to men;
    But we'll outface them, and outswear them too.
    When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
    And they did make no noise- in such a night,
    Troilus methinks mounted the Troyan walls,
    And sigh'd his soul toward the Grecian tents,
    Did Thisby fearfully o'ertrip the dew,
    And saw the lion's shadow ere himself,
    Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love
    Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
    Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
    But, hark, I hear the footing of a man.
  LORENZO. Who comes so fast in silence of the night?
    My mistress will before the break of day
    But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica,
    Some welcome for the mistress of the house.
  LAUNCELOT. Tell him there's a post come from my master with his
  LORENZO. Sweet soul, let's in, and there expect their coming.
    Within the house, your mistress is at hand;
    And bring your music forth into the air.       Exit STEPHANO
    How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!
    Here will we sit and let the sounds of music
    Creep in our ears; soft stillness and the night
    Become the touches of sweet harmony.
    Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven
    There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st
    Still quiring to the young-ey'd cherubins;
    Which is the hot condition of their blood-
    If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
    Or any air of music touch their ears,
    You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
    By the sweet power of music. Therefore the poet
    But music for the time doth change his nature.
    Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music.
  NERISSA. When the moon shone, we did not see the candle.
  PORTIA. So doth the greater glory dim the less:
    Until a king be by, and then his state
    Into the main of waters. Music! hark!
  NERISSA. It is your music, madam, of the house.
  PORTIA. The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark
    When neither is attended; and I think
    No better a musician than the wren.
    To their right praise and true perfection!
  LORENZO. That is the voice,
  PORTIA. He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo,
    By the bad voice.
    Which speed, we hope, the better for our words.
    Are they return'd?
  LORENZO. Madam, they are not yet;
    But there is come a messenger before,
    To signify their coming.
    Give order to my servants that they take
  PORTIA. This night methinks is but the daylight sick;
    Such as the day is when the sun is hid.
       Enter BASSANIO, ANTONIO, GRATIANO, and their followers
  BASSANIO. We should hold day with the Antipodes,
    If you would walk in absence of the sun.
    This is the man, this is Antonio,
    It must appear in other ways than words,
    In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk.
  PORTIA. A quarrel, ho, already! What's the matter?
    For all the world like cutler's poetry
  NERISSA. What talk you of the posy or the value?
    No higher than thyself, the judge's clerk;
    Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth
    That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano,
    And swear I lost the ring defending it.
    Unto the judge that begg'd it, and indeed
    Deserv'd it too; and then the boy, his clerk,
    And neither man nor master would take aught
    But the two rings.
    Hath not the ring upon it; it is gone.
    Until I see the ring.
    If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
    If you did know for whom I gave the ring,
    And would conceive for what I gave the ring,
    And how unwillingly I left the ring,
    When nought would be accepted but the ring,
    You would abate the strength of your displeasure.
  PORTIA. If you had known the virtue of the ring,
    Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
    Or your own honour to contain the ring,
    You would not then have parted with the ring.
    What man is there so much unreasonable,
    With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
    To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
    I'll die for't but some woman had the ring.
    And begg'd the ring; the which I did deny him,
    Even he that had held up the very life
    For by these blessed candles of the night,
    Had you been there, I think you would have begg'd
    The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.
    Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
  NERISSA. And I his clerk; therefore be well advis'd
  GRATIANO. Well, do you so, let not me take him then;
    For, if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen.
  ANTONIO. I am th' unhappy subject of these quarrels.
    And in the hearing of these many friends
    I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes,
    And there's an oath of credit.
    I never more will break an oath with thee.
    My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
    And bid him keep it better than the other.
  BASSANIO. By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!
    For, by this ring, the doctor lay with me.
    For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk,
  GRATIANO. Why, this is like the mending of highways
    In summer, where the ways are fair enough.
    There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
    Nerissa there her clerk. Lorenzo here
  BASSANIO. Were you the doctor, and I knew you not?
  GRATIANO. Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?
  NERISSA. Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
    When I am absent, then lie with my wife.
  NERISSA. Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.
    From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
  LORENZO. Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way
    Of these events at full. Let us go in,
    And charge us there upon inter'gatories,
    Whether till the next night she had rather stay,
    But were the day come, I should wish it dark,
    Till I were couching with the doctor's clerk.
    Well, while I live, I'll fear no other thing
  HOST of the Garter Inn
Windsor, and the neighbourhood
  SLENDER. In the county of Gloucester, Justice of Peace, and
  SHALLOW. Ay, that I do; and have done any time these three
    and all his ancestors, that come after him, may: they may
    give the dozen white luces in their coat.
  SHALLOW. The luce is the fresh fish; the salt fish is an old
  EVANS. Yes, py'r lady! If he has a quarter of your coat, there
    disparagements unto you, I am of the church, and will be
  EVANS. It is not meet the Council hear a riot; there is no
    fear of Got in a riot; the Council, look you, shall desire
    to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a riot; take your
  SHALLOW. Ha! o' my life, if I were young again, the sword
  EVANS. It is petter that friends is the sword and end it;
    and there is also another device in my prain, which
  EVANS. It is that fery person for all the orld, as just as you
  EVANS. Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.
  SHALLOW. I know the young gentlewoman; she has good
    there?
    true. The knight Sir John is there; and, I beseech you, be
    ruled by your well-willers. I will peat the door for Master
  PAGE.  [Within]  Who's there?
    shall tell you another tale, if matters grow to your
  SHALLOW. Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog. Can there be
    the King?
    and Pistol. They carried me to the tavern, and made me
    Master Page, fidelicet Master Page; and there is myself,
    fidelicet myself; and the three party is, lastly and
    finally, mine host of the Garter.
  PAGE. We three to hear it and end it between them.
    and we will afterwards ork upon the cause with as great
  SLENDER. Ay, by these gloves, did he-or I would I might
    of Yead Miller, by these gloves.
  SLENDER. By these gloves, then, 'twas he.
    'marry trap' with you, if you run the nuthook's humour on
    me; that is the very note of it.
  SLENDER. By this hat, then, he in the red face had it; for
    drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass.
  BARDOLPH. Why, sir, for my part, I say the gentleman had
  EVANS. It is his five senses; fie, what the ignorance is!
  BARDOLPH. And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashier'd;
    and so conclusions pass'd the careers.
  SLENDER. Ay, you spake in Latin then too; but 'tis no matter;
    drunk with those that have the fear of God, and not with
  FALSTAFF. You hear all these matters deni'd, gentlemen; you
  PAGE. Nay, daughter, carry the wine in; we'll drink within.
  PAGE. Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a
  SLENDER. I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book of
    myself, must I? You have not the Book of Riddles about you,
    with you, coz; marry, this, coz: there is, as 'twere, a
    description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
  EVANS. But that is not the question. The question is
  SHALLOW. Ay, there's the point, sir.
  EVANS. Marry is it; the very point of it; to Mistress Anne
  EVANS. But can you affection the oman? Let us command to
    hold that the lips is parcel of the mouth. Therefore,
    precisely, can you carry your good will to the maid?
    I do is to pleasure you, coz. Can you love the maid?
  SLENDER. I will marry her, sir, at your request; but if there
    be no great love in the beginning, yet heaven may decrease
    have more occasion to know one another. I hope upon
  EVANS. It is a fery discretion answer, save the fall is in the
    ord 'dissolutely': the ort is, according to our meaning,
  ANNE. The dinner is on the table; my father desires your
  EVANS. Od's plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.
    and a boy yet, till my mother be dead. But what though?
  ANNE. I may not go in without your worship; they will not
  SLENDER. I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruis'd my
    shin th' other day with playing at sword and dagger with
    and, by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meat
    since. Why do your dogs bark so? Be there bears i' th'
  ANNE. I think there are, sir; I heard them talk'd of.
  SLENDER. I love the sport well; but I shall as soon quarrel at
    it as any man in England. You are afraid, if you see the
    Sackerson loose twenty times, and have taken him by the
    chain; but I warrant you, the women have so cried and
    abide 'em; they are very ill-favour'd rough things.
  SLENDER. Nay, pray you lead the way.
  SLENDER. I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome. You
    is the way; and there dwells one Mistress Quickly, which
    is in the manner of his nurse, or his dry nurse, or his cook,
    oman that altogether's acquaintance with Mistress Anne
    Page; and the letter is to desire and require her to solicit
    be gone. I will make an end of my dinner; there's pippins
  FALSTAFF. Mine host of the Garter!
  HOST. Discard, bully Hercules; cashier; let them wag; trot,
    see thee froth and lime. I am at a word; follow.   Exit HOST
    an old cloak makes a new jerkin; a wither'd serving-man a
  PISTOL. O base Hungarian wight! Wilt thou the spigot
  NYM. He was gotten in drink. Is not the humour conceited?
    thefts were too open; his filching was like an unskilful
  PISTOL. 'Convey' the wise it call. 'Steal' foh! A fico for the
  PISTOL. Why, then, let kibes ensue.
  PISTOL. I ken the wight; he is of substance good.
  FALSTAFF. No quips now, Pistol. Indeed, I am in the waist
    gives the leer of invitation; I can construe the action of her
    familiar style; and the hardest voice of her behaviour, to be
  FALSTAFF. Now, the report goes she has all the rule of her
  NYM. The humour rises; it is good; humour me the angels.
    another to Page's wife, who even now gave me good eyes
    sometimes the beam of her view gilded my foot, sometimes my
  PISTOL. Then did the sun on dunghill shine.
  NYM. I thank thee for that humour.
    a greedy intention that the appetite of her eye did seem to
    scorch me up like a burning-glass! Here's another letter to
    her. She bears the purse too; she is a region in Guiana, all
    gold and bounty. I will be cheaters to them both, and they
    shall be exchequers to me; they shall be my East and West
    Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go, bear thou this
  NYM. I will run no base humour. Here, take the
    humour-letter; I will keep the haviour of reputation.
  FALSTAFF.  [To ROBIN]  Hold, sirrah; bear you these letters
    Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.
    Falstaff will learn the humour of the age;
    And high and low beguiles the rich and poor;
  NYM. With both the humours, I.
    I will discuss the humour of this love to Page.
    with poison; I will possess him with yellowness; for the
  PISTOL. Thou art the Mars of malcontents; I second thee;
  QUICKLY. What, John Rugby! I pray thee go to the casement
    Caius, coming. If he do, i' faith, and find anybody in the
    the King's English.
    faith, at the latter end of a sea-coal fire.  [Exit RUGBY]  An
    man; go into this closet.  [Shuts SIMPLE in the closet]  He
    he went not in himself; if he had found the young man,
    Come, take-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the
  RUGBY. 'Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.
    Dere is some simples in my closet dat I vill not for the
  QUICKLY. Ay me, he'll find the young man there, and be
  QUICKLY. I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic; hear the
    in the way of marriage.
    in the fire, and need not.
    do you your master what good I can; and the very yea and
    the no is, the French doctor, my master-I may call him
    wring, brew, bake, scour, dress meat and drink, make the
    Anne's mind-that's neither here nor there.
  QUICKLY. Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. We
    must give folks leave to prate. What the good-year!
  CAIUS. Rugby, come to the court with me. By gar, if I have
  FENTON.  [Within]  Who's within there? ho!
  QUICKLY. Who's there, I trow? Come near the house, I pray
    the way; I praise heaven for it.
  QUICKLY. Well, thereby hangs a tale; good faith, it is such
    another Nan; but, I detest, an honest maid as ever broke
  FENTON. Well, I shall see her to-day. Hold, there's money
    for thee; let me have thy voice in my behalf. If thou seest
    worship more of the wart the next time we have confidence;
    and of other wooers.
    Anne's mind as well as another does. Out upon 't, what
  MRS. PAGE. What! have I scap'd love-letters in the holiday-time
    of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them? Let
    You are not young, no more am I; go to, then, there's
    sympathy. You are merry, so am I; ha! ha! then there's
    desire better sympathy? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page
    at the least, if the love of soldier can suffice-that I love
    thee. I will not say, Pity me: 'tis not a soldier-like phrase;
    For thee to fight,
    hath this Flemish drunkard pick'd-with the devil's name!
    What should I say to him? I was then frugal of my mirth.
    Heaven forgive me! Why, I'll exhibit a bill in the parliament
    for the putting down of men. How shall I be
    the contrary.
  MRS. FORD. Well, I do, then; yet, I say, I could show you to
    the contrary. O Mistress Page, give me some counsel.
  MRS. PAGE. What's the matter, woman?
  MRS. PAGE. Hang the trifle, woman; take the honour. What
    will hack; and so thou shouldst not alter the article of thy
    how I might be knighted. I shall think the worse of fat
    would have gone to the truth of his words; but they do no
    more adhere and keep place together than the Hundredth
    Psalm to the tune of 'Greensleeves.' What tempest, I trow,
    think the best way were to entertain him with hope, till
    the wicked fire of lust have melted him in his own grease.
    Did you ever hear the like?
  MRS. PAGE. Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and
    opinions, here's the twin-brother of thy letter; but let thine
    hath a thousand of these letters, writ with blank space for
    different names-sure, more!-and these are of the second
    edition. He will print them, out of doubt; for he cares not
    what he puts into the press when he would put us two. I
    had rather be a giantess and lie under Mount Pelion. Well,
  MRS. FORD. Why, this is the very same; the very hand, the
    horses to mine host of the Garter.
    him that may not sully the chariness of our honesty. O
  MRS. FORD. You are the happier woman.
  MRS. PAGE. Let's consult together against this greasy knight.
    Come hither.                                   [They retire]
    Both young and old, one with another, Ford;
    He loves the gallimaufry. Ford, perpend.
    O, odious is the name!
  NYM.  [To PAGE]  And this is true; I like not the humour of
    have borne the humour'd letter to her; but I have a sword,
    there's the short and the long.
    Adieu! I love not the humour of bread and cheese; and
    there's the humour of it. Adieu.                    Exit Nym
  PAGE. I will not believe such a Cataian though the priest o'
  MRS. PAGE. Whither go you, George? Hark you.
  PAGE. Yes; and you heard what the other told me?
  FORD. Do you think there is truth in them?
  PAGE. Hang 'em, slaves! I do not think the knight would offer it;
    but these that accuse him in his intent towards our
    they be out of service.
  FORD. Were they his men?
  PAGE. Marry, were they.
  FORD. I like it never the better for that. Does he lie at the
    turn them together. A man may be too confident. I would
  PAGE. Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes.
    There is either liquor in his pate or money in his purse
  SHALLOW. Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hugh
    the Welsh priest and Caius the French doctor.
    merry host hath had the measuring of their weapons; and,
    I think, hath appointed them contrary places; for, believe
    me, I hear the parson is no jester. Hark, I will tell you
  PAGE. I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in his
  SHALLOW. Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these
    I know not what. 'Tis the heart, Master Page; 'tis here,
    'tis here. I have seen the time with my long sword I would
  PAGE. Have with you. I had rather hear them scold than
    they made there I know not. Well, I will look further into
    honest, I lose not my labour; if she be otherwise, 'tis labour
A room in the Garter Inn
  FALSTAFF. I will not lend thee a penny.
  PISTOL. I will retort the sum in equipage.
  PISTOL. Why, then the world's mine oyster. Which I with
    Nym; or else you had look'd through the grate, like a
    and when Mistress Bridget lost the handle of her fan,
    keep the terms of my honour precise. I, I, I myself
    sometimes, leaving the fear of God on the left hand, and hiding
    your bold-beating oaths, under the shelter of your honour!
  FALSTAFF. Good maid, then.
    As my mother was, the first hour I was born.
  FALSTAFF. I do believe the swearer. What with me?
    thee the hearing.
  FALSTAFF. I warrant thee nobody hears-mine own people,
  QUICKLY. Are they so? God bless them, and make them his
  QUICKLY. Marry, this is the short and the long of it: you
    The best courtier of them all, when the court lay at Windsor,
    there has been knights, and lords, and gentlemen, with
    their coaches; I warrant you, coach after coach, letter after
    terms; and in such wine and sugar of the best and the
    warrant you, they could never get an eye-wink of her.
    defy all angels, in any such sort, as they say, but in the
    way of honesty; and, I warrant you, they could never get
    her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of them all;
    and yet there has been earls, nay, which is more,
  QUICKLY. Marry, she hath receiv'd your letter; for the
  QUICKLY. Ay, forsooth; and then you may come and see
    the picture, she says, that you wot of. Master Ford, her
    husband, will be from home. Alas, the sweet woman leads
  QUICKLY. Why, you say well. But I have another messenger
    Windsor, whoe'er be the other; and she bade me tell your
    hopes there will come a time. I never knew a woman so
  FALSTAFF. Not I, I assure thee; setting the attraction of my
    good parts aside, I have no other charms.
  FALSTAFF. But, I pray thee, tell me this: has Ford's wife and
    Page's wife acquainted each other how they love me?
    Her husband has a marvellous infection to the little page;
    deserves it; for if there be a kind woman in Windsor, she
  QUICKLY. Nay, but do so then; and, look you, he may come
    nay-word, that you may know one another's mind, and the boy
    know, have discretion, as they say, and know the world.
  FALSTAFF. Fare thee well; commend me to them both.
    Give fire; she is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!    Exit
    more of thy old body than I have done. Will they yet look
    after thee? Wilt thou, after the expense of so much money,
    be now a gainer? Good body, I thank thee. Let them say
  BARDOLPH. Sir John, there's one Master Brook below would
    a lender than you are; the which hath something
    embold'ned me to this unseason'd intrusion; for they say, if
    me of the carriage.
  FORD. I will tell you, sir, if you will give me the hearing.
    hear them unfolded, turn another into the register of your
    own, that I may pass with a reproof the easier, sith you
    hath been on the wing of all occasions. But whatsoever I
    have merited, either in my mind or in my means, meed, I
    FALSTAFF. Of what quality was your love, then?
  FORD. Like a fair house built on another man's ground; so
    that I have lost my edifice by mistaking the place where
    say that though she appear honest to me, yet in other
    places she enlargeth her mirth so far that there is shrewd
    construction made of her. Now, Sir John, here is the heart
    breeding, admirable discourse, of great admittance, authentic in
    siege to the honesty of this Ford's wife; use your art of
    FALSTAFF. Would it apply well to the vehemency of your
  FORD. O, understand my drift. She dwells so securely on the
    excellency of her honour that the folly of my soul dares
    my desires had instance and argument to commend themselves;
    I could drive her then from the ward of her purity,
    her reputation, her marriage vow, and a thousand other her
    ten and eleven; for at that time the jealous rascally
    not; yet I wrong him to call him poor; they say the
    jealous wittolly knave hath masses of money; for the which
    his wife seems to me well-favour'd. I will use her as the
    key of the cuckoldly rogue's coffer; and there's my harvest-home.
    it shall hang like a meteor o'er the cuckold's horns. Master
    Brook, thou shalt know I will predominate over the
    jealousy? My wife hath sent to him; the hour is fix'd;
    the match is made. Would any man have thought this? See
    the hell of having a false woman! My bed shall be abus'd,
    not only receive this villainous wrong, but stand under the
    well; Barbason, well; yet they are devils' additions, the names
    of fiends. But cuckold! Wittol! Cuckold! the devil himself
    his wife; he will not be jealous; I will rather trust a Fleming
    with my butter, Parson Hugh the Welshman with my
    she plots, then she ruminates, then she devises; and what
    they think in their hearts they may effect, they will break
    their hearts but they will effect. God be prais'd for my
    jealousy! Eleven o'clock the hour. I will prevent this, detect
  RUGBY. 'Tis past the hour, sir, that Sir Hugh promis'd to
  HOST. Bless thee, bully doctor!
  HOST. To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee traverse;
    to see thee here, to see thee there; to see thee pass thy
  SHALLOW. He is the wiser man, Master Doctor: he is a curer
    you go against the hair of your professions. Is it not true,
    of the peace, if I see a sword out, my finger itches to make
    the sons of women, Master Page.
  CAIUS, I come to fetch you home. I am sworn of the peace;
  CAIUS. By gar, then I have as much mockvater as de Englishman.
  HOST. He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.
  HOST. That is, he will make thee amends.
  HOST. And, moreover, bully-but first:  [Aside to the others]
    go you through the town to Frogmore.
  PAGE.  [Aside]  Sir Hugh is there, is he?
  HOST.  [Aside]  He is there. See what humour he is in; and
    I will bring the doctor about by the fields. Will it do well?
  HOST. Let him die. Sheathe thy impatience; throw cold water
    on thy choler; go about the fields with me through Frogmore;
    I will bring thee where Mistress Anne Page is, at a a
  HOST. For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne
  HOST. Let us wag, then.
  SIMPLE. Marry, sir, the pittie-ward, the park-ward; every
    way; old Windsor way, and every way but the town way.
    costard when I have goot opportunities for the ork. Pless
    Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?
    Shallow, and another gentleman, from Frogmore, over the
    Sir Hugh. Keep a gamester from the dice, and a good student
  SHALLOW. What, the sword and the word! Do you study
    them both, Master Parson?
  PAGE. I think you know him: Master Doctor Caius, the
  PAGE. I warrant you, he's the man should fight with him.
  SHALLOW. It appears so, by his weapons. Keep them asunder;
  HOST. Disarm them, and let them question; let them keep
    their limbs whole and hack our English.
    laughing-stocks to other men's humours; I desire you in
    friendship, and I will one way or other make you amends.
  EVANS. As I am a Christians soul, now, look you, this is the
    place appointed. I'll be judgment by mine host of the
  HOST. Peace, I say. Hear mine host of the Garter. Am I
    doctor? No; he gives me the potions and the motions. Shall I
    the proverbs and the noverbs. Give me thy hand, terrestrial;
    sack be the issue. Come, lay their swords to pawn. Follow
    together to be revenge on this same scall, scurvy, cogging
    companion, the host of the Garter.
    wont to be a follower, but now you are a leader. Whether
    had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your master's heels?
  ROBIN. I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man than
  FORD. Well met, Mistress Page. Whither go you?
  FORD. Ay; and as idle as she may hang together, for want of
  MRS. PAGE. Be sure of that-two other husbands.
  FORD. Where had you this pretty weathercock?
  MRS. PAGE. I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my
    thinking? Sure, they sleep; he hath no use of them. Why,
    man may hear this show'r sing in the wind. And Falstaff's
    wives share damnation together. Well; I will take him,
    then torture my wife, pluck the borrowed veil of modesty
    from the so seeming Mistress Page, divulge Page himself
    for a secure and wilful Actaeon; and to these violent proceedings
    search; there I shall find Falstaff. I shall be rather prais'd
    for this than mock'd; for it is as positive as the earth is firm
    that Falstaff is there. I will go.
  SLENDER. I hope I have your good will, father Page.
    my wife, Master Doctor, is for you altogether.
    of no having: he kept company with the wild Prince and
    he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes with the finger of
    my substance; if he take her, let him take her simply; the
  SHALLOW. Well, fare you well; we shall have the freer
  MRS. PAGE. Quickly, quickly! Is the buck-basket-
  MRS. PAGE. Give your men the charge; we must be brief.
    ready here hard by in the brew-house; and when I suddenly
    trudge with it in all haste, and carry it among the whitsters
    in Datchet Mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch
    close by the Thames side.
  MRS. FORD. I ha' told them over and over; they lack no
    be a tailor to thee, and shall make thee a new doublet and
  MRS. PAGE. I warrant thee; if I do not act it, hiss me.
  MRS. FORD. Go to, then; we'll use this unwholesome
  FALSTAFF. Have I caught thee, my heavenly jewel?
    the period of my ambition. O this blessed hour!
    husband were dead; I'll speak it before the best lord, I
    would make thee my lady.
  FALSTAFF. Let the court of France show me such another. I
    see how thine eye would emulate the diamond; thou hast
    the right arched beauty of the brow that becomes the
    ship-tire, the tire-valiant, or any tire of Venetian admittance.
    nothing else, nor that well neither.
  FALSTAFF. By the Lord, thou art a tyrant to say so; thou
    wouldst make an absolute courtier, and the firm fixture of
  MRS. FORD. Believe me, there's no such thing in me.
  FALSTAFF. What made me love thee? Let that persuade thee
    there's something extra-ordinary in thee. Come, I cannot
    cog, and say thou art this and that, like a many of these
    cannot; but I love thee, none but thee; and thou deserv'st it.
  FALSTAFF. Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by the
    Counter-gate, which is as hateful to me as the reek of a
    Mistress Page at the door, sweating and blowing and looking
    the arras.
    What's the matter? How now!
  MRS. FORD. What's the matter, good Mistress Page?
  MRS. FORD. Why, alas, what's the matter?
  MRS. PAGE. Your husband's coming hither, woman, with all
    the officers in Windsor, to search for a gentleman that he
    says is here now in the house, by your consent, to take an
    I had rather than a thousand pound he were out of the
  MRS. PAGE. For shame, never stand 'you had rather' and 'you
    had rather'! Your husband's here at hand; bethink you of
    some conveyance; in the house you cannot hide him. O,
  MRS. FORD. He's too big to go in there. What shall I do?
    Are these your letters, knight?
  FALSTAFF.  [Aside to MRS. PAGE]  I love thee and none but
    thee; help me away.-Let me creep in here; I'll never-
    [Gets into the basket; they cover him with foul linen]
    Go, take up these clothes here, quickly; where's the
    cowl-staff? Look how you drumble. Carry them to the laundress
    then make sport at me, then let me be your jest; I deserve
    it. How now, whither bear you this?
  SERVANT. To the laundress, forsooth.
  MRS. FORD. Why, what have you to do whither they bear it?
  FORD. Buck? I would I could wash myself of the buck!
    the season too, it shall appear.  [Exeunt SERVANTS with
    search, seek, find out. I'll warrant we'll unkennel the fox.
    Let me stop this way first.  [Locking the door]  So, now
  CAIUS. By gar, 'tis no the fashion of France; it is not jealous
  PAGE. Nay, follow him, gentlemen; see the issue of his
  MRS. PAGE. Is there not a double excellency in this?
    ask'd who was in the basket!
    throwing him into the water will do him a benefit.
  MRS. PAGE. Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the
    same strain were in the same distress.
    Quickly, to him, and excuse his throwing into the water,
    and give him another hope, to betray him to another
  FORD. I cannot find him; may be the knave bragg'd of that
  EVANS. If there be any pody in the house, and in the
    chambers, and in the coffers, and in the presses, heaven forgive
    my sins at the day of judgment!
  CAIUS. Be gar, nor I too; there is no bodies.
    your distemper in this kind for the wealth of Windsor
    the Park. I pray you pardon me; I will hereafter make
    after, we'll a-birding together; I have a fine hawk for
    the bush. Shall it be so?
  EVANS. If there is one, I shall make two in the company.
  CAIUS. If there be one or two, I shall make-a the turd.
  EVANS. I pray you now, remembrance to-morrow on the
  FENTON. I see I cannot get thy father's love;
  ANNE. Alas, how then?
    Besides these, other bars he lays before me,
    I should love thee but as a property.
    Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth
    Was the first motive that I woo'd thee, Anne;
    Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value
    And 'tis the very riches of thyself
    Yet seek my father's love; still seek it, sir.
    Cannot attain it, why then-hark you hither.
  SHALLOW. Break their talk, Mistress Quickly; my kinsman
  ANNE. I come to him.  [Aside]  This is my father's choice.
    father!
  SLENDER. I had a father, Mistress Anne; my uncle can tell
    the jest how my father stole two geese out of a pen, good
  SLENDER. Ay, that I will come cut and longtail, under the
    with you. Your father and my uncle hath made motions;
    your father; here he comes.
    I must advance the colours of my love,
  ANNE. Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.
  ANNE. Alas, I had rather be set quick i' th' earth.
    Till then, farewell, sir; she must needs go in;
    Her father will be angry.
  FENTON. I thank thee; and I pray thee, once to-night
  QUICKLY. Now Heaven send thee good fortune!  [Exit
    do what I can for them all three, for so I have promis'd,
    Fenton. Well, I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff
    butcher's offal, and to be thrown in the Thames? Well, if
    I be serv'd such another trick, I'll have my brains ta'en out
    and butter'd, and give them to a dog for a new-year's gift.
    The rogues slighted me into the river with as little remorse
    as they would have drown'd a blind bitch's puppies, fifteen
    a kind of alacrity in sinking; if the bottom were as deep as
    hell I should down. I had been drown'd but that the shore
    was shelvy and shallow-a death that I abhor; for the water
  FALSTAFF. Come, let me pour in some sack to the Thames
    snowballs for pills to cool the reins. Call her in.
  FALSTAFF. Take away these chalices. Go, brew me a pottle
    thrown into the ford; I have my belly full of ford.
  QUICKLY. Alas the day, good heart, that was not her fault!
    She does so take on with her men; they mistook their
    think what a man is. Let her consider his frailty, and then
    house the hour she appointed me.
  FALSTAFF. No. Master Brook; but the peaking cornuto her
    jealousy, comes me in the instant of our, encounter, after
    the prologue of our comedy; and at his heels a rabble of his
    companions, thither provoked and instigated by his
  FORD. What, while you were there?
  FALSTAFF. While I was there.
    and, in her invention and Ford's wife's distraction, they
  FALSTAFF. By the Lord, a buck-basket! Ramm'd me in with
    napkins, that, Master Brook, there was the rankest compound
  FORD. And how long lay you there?
    thus cramm'd in the basket, a couple of Ford's knaves, his
    hinds, were call'd forth by their mistress to carry me in
    the name of foul clothes to Datchet Lane; they took me on
    their shoulders; met the jealous knave their master in the
    door; who ask'd them once or twice what they had in their
    basket. I quak'd for fear lest the lunatic knave would have
    went I for foul clothes. But mark the sequel, Master
    Brook-I suffered the pangs of three several deaths: first,
    bell-wether; next, to be compass'd like a good bilbo in the
    then, to be stopp'd in, like a strong distillation, with
    stinking clothes that fretted in their own grease. Think of that
    was a miracle to scape suffocation. And in the height of
    a Dutch dish, to be thrown into the Thames, and cool'd,
    have suffer'd all this. My suit, then, is desperate;
    her another embassy of meeting; 'twixt eight and nine is
    the hour, Master Brook.
  FALSTAFF. Is it? I Will then address me to my appointment.
    know how I speed; and the conclusion shall be crowned
    proclaim myself what I am; I will now take the lecher; he
    a pepper box. But, lest the devil that guides him should aid
    me tame. If I have horns to make one mad, let the proverb
    he is very courageous mad about his throwing into the
  EVANS. No; Master Slender is let the boys leave to play.
    nothing in the world at his book; I pray you ask him some
  EVANS. Come hither, William; hold up your head; come.
  QUICKLY. Truly, I thought there had been one number
    more, because they say 'Od's nouns.'
  WILLIAM. Articles are borrowed of the pronoun, and be
  EVANS. Leave your prabbles, oman. What is the focative
  QUICKLY. YOU do ill to teach the child such words. He
    teaches him to hick and to hack, which they'll do fast
    enough of themselves; and to call 'horum'; fie upon you!
    for thy cases, and the numbers of the genders? Thou
  MRS. PAGE. Prithee hold thy peace.
    the simple office of love, but in all the accoutrement,
  MRS. PAGE. How now, sweetheart, who's at home besides
    of what complexion soever; and so buffets himself on the
    to this his distemper he is in now. I am glad the fat knight
    the last time he search'd for him, in a basket; protests to
    my husband he is now here; and hath drawn him and the
    rest of their company from their sport, to make another
    experiment of his suspicion. But I am glad the knight is not
  MRS. FORD. I am undone: the knight is here.
  MRS. PAGE. Why, then, you are utterly sham'd, and he's but
    him? Shall I put him into the basket again?
  MRS. PAGE. Alas, three of Master Ford's brothers watch the
    door with pistols, that none shall issue out; otherwise you
  FALSTAFF. What shall I do? I'll creep up into the chimney.
  MRS. FORD. There they always use to discharge their
  MRS. PAGE. Creep into the kiln-hole.
  MRS. FORD. He will seek there, on my word. Neither press,
    the remembrance of such places, and goes to them by his
    note. There is no hiding you in the house.
  FALSTAFF. I'll go out then.
  MRS. PAGE. Alas the day, I know not! There is no woman's
    gown big enough for him; otherwise he might put on a
    rather than a mischief.
  MRS. FORD. My Maid's aunt, the fat woman of Brainford, has
    is; and there's her thrumm'd hat, and her muffler too. Run
    on the gown the while.                         Exit FALSTAFF
    shape; he cannot abide the old woman of Brainford; he
    the devil guide his cudgel afterwards!
  MRS. PAGE. Ay, in good sadness is he; and talks of the basket
    the basket again, to meet him at the door with it as they
    him like the witch of Brainford.
  MRS. FORD. I'll first direct my men what they shall do with
    the basket. Go up; I'll bring linen for him straight.   Exit
    'Tis old but true: Still swine eats all the draff.      Exit
  MRS. FORD. Go, sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders;
    way then to unfool me again? Set down the basket, villain!
    rascals, there's a knot, a ging, a pack, a conspiracy
    against me. Now shall the devil be sham'd. What, wife, I
    say! Come, come forth; behold what honest clothes you
    Come hither, Mistress Ford; Mistress Ford, the honest
    woman, the modest wife, the virtuous creature, that hath
    the jealous fool to her husband! I suspect without cause,
                           [Pulling clothes out of the basket]
  MRS. FORD. Are you not asham'd? Let the clothes alone.
    clothes? Come away.
  FORD. Empty the basket, I say.
  FORD. Master Page, as I am a man, there was one convey'd
    he be there again? In my house I am sure he is; my
    Pluck me out all the linen.
  MRS. FORD. If you find a man there, he shall die a flea's
  EVANS. Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the
    ever be your table sport; let them say of me 'As jealous as
  MRS. FORD. What, hoa, Mistress Page! Come you and the old
    woman down; my husband will come into the chamber.
    under the profession of fortune-telling. She works by
    him not strike the old woman.
   Re-enter FALSTAFF in woman's clothes, and MISTRESS PAGE
  MRS. PAGE. Come, Mother Prat; come. give me your hand.
  MRS. PAGE. Are you not asham'd? I think you have kill'd the
  EVANS. By yea and no, I think the oman is a witch indeed; I
    see but the issue of my jealousy; if I cry out thus upon no
  PAGE. Let's obey his humour a little further. Come,
  MRS. PAGE. I'll have the cudgel hallow'd and hung o'er the
  MRS. FORD. What think you? May we, with the warrant of
    womanhood and the witness of a good conscience, pursue
    him with any further revenge?
    him; if the devil have him not in fee-simple, with fine and
    recovery, he will never, I think, in the way of waste,
  MRS. PAGE. Yes, by all means; if it be but to scrape the
    figures out of your husband's brains. If they can find in their
    hearts the poor unvirtuous fat knight shall be any further
    afflicted, we two will still be the ministers.
  MRS. FORD. I'll warrant they'll have him publicly sham'd;
    and methinks there would be no period to the jest, should
  MRS. PAGE. Come, to the forge with it then; shape it. I
  BARDOLPH. Sir, the Germans desire to have three of your
    horses; the Duke himself will be to-morrow at court, and
    they are going to meet him.
    not of him in the court. Let me speak with the gentlemen;
    they speak English?
  BARDOLPH. Ay, sir; I'll call them to you.
  HOST. They shall have my horses, but I'll make them pay;
    I'll sauce them; they have had my house a week at
    command; I have turn'd away my other guests. They must
    come off; I'll sauce them. Come.                      Exeunt
  EVANS. 'Tis one of the best discretions of a oman as ever
  PAGE. And did he send you both these letters at an instant?
    I rather will suspect the sun with cold
    Than thee with wantonness. Now doth thy honour stand,
  FORD. There is no better way than that they spoke of.
  PAGE. How? To send him word they'll meet him in the Park
  EVANS. You say he has been thrown in the rivers; and has
    been grievously peaten as an old oman; methinks there
    And let us two devise to bring him thither.
  MRS. PAGE. There is an old tale goes that Heme the Hunter,
    Doth all the winter-time, at still midnight,
    And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
    This tale of Heme the Hunter for a truth.
  PAGE. Why yet there want not many that do fear
    And in this shape. When you have brought him thither,
    And three or four more of their growth, we'll dress
    With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads,
    And rattles in their hands; upon a sudden,
    Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
    With some diffused song; upon their sight
    Then let them all encircle him about,
    And fairy-like, to pinch the unclean knight;
    In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
  MRS. FORD. And till he tell the truth,
    Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound,
    And burn him with their tapers.
    We'll all present ourselves; dis-horn the spirit,
    Be practis'd well to this or they'll nev'r do 't.
  EVANS. I will teach the children their behaviours; and I will
    be like a jack-an-apes also, to burn the knight with my
  FORD. That will be excellent. I'll go buy them vizards.
  MRS. PAGE. My Nan shall be the Queen of all the Fairies,
    I'll to the Doctor; he hath my good will,
    Speak, breathe, discuss; brief, short, quick, snap.
    standing-bed and truckle-bed; 'tis painted about with the
    story of the Prodigal, fresh and new. Go, knock and can; he'll
    speak like an Anthropophaginian unto thee. Knock, I say.
    military. Art thou there? It is thine host, thine Ephesian, calls.
  HOST. Here's a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of
  SIMPLE. Pray you, sir, was't not the wise woman of
    seeing her go thorough the streets, to know, sir, whether one
    Nym, sir, that beguil'd him of a chain, had the chain or no.
  FALSTAFF. I spake with the old woman about it.
  FALSTAFF Marry, she says that the very same man that
  SIMPLE. I would I could have spoken with the woman
    herself; I had other things to have spoken with her too,
  FALSTAFF. What are they? Let us know.
  SIMPLE. I may not conceal them, sir.
  FALSTAFF. Conceal them, or thou diest.
    SIMPLE.. Why, sir, they were nothing but about Mistress
  FALSTAFF. To have her, or no. Go; say the woman told me
    with these tidings.                              Exit SIMPLE
    there a wise woman with thee?
  FALSTAFF. Ay, that there was, mine host; one that hath
    and I paid nothing for it neither, but was paid for my
  HOST. Where be my horses? Speak well of them, varletto.
  BARDOLPH. Run away with the cozeners; for so soon as I
    came beyond Eton, they threw me off from behind one of
    them, in a slough of mire; and set spurs and away, like
  HOST. They are gone but to meet the Duke, villain; do not
    say they be fled. Germans are honest men.
  HOST. What is the matter, sir?
    of mine come to town tells me there is three
    cozen-germans that has cozen'd all the hosts of Readins,
    trot, dere is no duke that the court is know to come; I
  FALSTAFF. I would all the world might be cozen'd, for I have
    been cozen'd and beaten too. If it should come to the car
    of the court how I have been transformed, and how my
    transformation hath been wash'd and cudgell'd, they
    fishermen's boots with me; I warrant they would whip me
    with their fine wits till I were as crestfall'n as a dried pear.
  QUICKLY. From the two parties, forsooth.
  FALSTAFF. The devil take one party and his dam the other!
    And so they shall be both bestowed. I have suffer'd more
    for their sakes, more than the villainous inconstancy of
  QUICKLY. And have not they suffer'd? Yes, I warrant;
    speciously one of them; Mistress Ford, good heart, is beaten
    beaten myself into all the colours of the rainbow; and
    was like to be apprehended for the witch of Brainford. But
    that my admirable dexterity of wit, my counterfeiting the
    action of an old woman, deliver'd me, the knave constable
    here is to bring you together! Sure, one of you does not
    And, as I am a gentleman, I'll give the
  HOST. I will hear you, Master Fenton; and I will, at the least,
    With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page;
    That neither, singly, can be manifested
    Without the show of both. Fat Falstaff
    Hath a great scene. The image of the jest
    Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen-
    While other jests are something rank on foot,
    Her father hath commanded her to slip
    Her mother, even strong against that match
    While other sports are tasking of their minds,
    And at the dean'ry, where a priest attends,
    Straight marry her. To this her mother's plot
    Made promise to the doctor. Now thus it rests:
    Her father means she shall be all in white;
    To take her by the hand and bid her go,
    She shall go with him; her mother hath intended
    The better to denote her to the doctor-
    For they must all be mask'd and vizarded-
    And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe,
    To pinch her by the hand, and, on that token,
  HOST. Which means she to deceive, father or mother?
    And here it rests-that you'll procure the vicar
    And in the lawful name of marrying,
  HOST. Well, husband your device; I'll to the vicar.
    Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.
  FENTON. So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
  FALSTAFF. Prithee, no more prattling; go. I'll, hold. This is
    the third time; I hope good luck lies in odd numbers.
    Away, go; they say there is divinity in odd numbers, either
    How now, Master Brook. Master Brook, the matter will
    be known tonight or never. Be you in the Park about
    the finest mad devil of jealousy in him, Master Brook, that
    in the shape of a woman; for in the shape of man, Master
    see the light of our fairies. Remember, son Slender, my daughter.
    a nay-word how to know one another. I come to her in
    know one another.
  SHALLOW. That's good too; but what needs either your mum
    Heaven prosper our sport! No man means evil but the
A street leading to the Park
    you see your time, take her by the hand, away with her to
    the deanery, and dispatch it quickly. Go before into the
    Park; we two must go together.
    will not rejoice so much at the abuse of Falstaff as he will
    chafe at the doctor's marrying my daughter; but 'tis no
    the Welsh devil, Hugh?
    oak, with obscur'd lights; which, at the very instant of
    Falstaff's and our meeting, they will at once display to the
  MRS. PAGE. Against such lewdsters and their lechery,
    Those that betray them do no treachery.
  MRS. FORD. The hour draws on. To the oak, to the oak!
    Be pold, I pray you; follow me into the pit; and when I
    give the watch-ords, do as I pid you. Come, come; trib,
Another part of the Park
  FALSTAFF. The Windsor bell hath struck twelve; the minute
    draws on. Now the hot-blooded gods assist me!
    beast a man; in some other a man a beast. You were also,
    Jupiter, a swan, for the love of Leda. O omnipotent love!
    how near the god drew to the complexion of a goose! A
    fault done first in the form of a beast-O Jove, a beastly
    fault!-and then another fault in the semblance of a fowl-
    stag; and the fattest, I think, i' th' forest. Send me a cool
  MRS. FORD. Sir John! Art thou there, my deer, my male deer.
  FALSTAFF. My doe with the black scut! Let the sky rain
    potatoes; let it thunder to the tune of Greensleeves, hail
    kissing-comfits, and snow eringoes; let there come a tempest
  MRS. FORD. Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.
    will keep my sides to myself, my shoulders for the fellow
    I a woodman, ha? Speak I like Heme the Hunter? Why,
  FALSTAFF. I think the devil will not have me damn'd, lest the
      a fairy, and OTHERS as the Fairy Queen, fairies, and
    Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes.
    There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry;
  FALSTAFF. They are fairies; he that speaks to them shall die.
    I'll wink and couch; no man their works must eye.
    Raise up the organs of her fantasy
    But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
    Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, and shins.
    That it may stand till the perpetual doom
    Worthy the owner and the owner it.
    Like to the Garter's compass, in a ring;
    More fertile-fresh than all the field to see;
    Fairies use flow'rs for their charactery.
    Our dance of custom round about the oak
    Of Herne the Hunter let us not forget.
    To guide our measure round about the tree.
    If he be chaste, the flame will back descend,
    It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.
             [They put the tapers to his fingers, and he starts]
    As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher.
        During this song they pinch FALSTAFF. DOCTOR
        green; SLENDER another way, and takes off a fairy in
        of hunting is heard within. All the fairies run away.
    Will none but Heme the Hunter serve your turn?
  MRS. PAGE. I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher.
    See you these, husband? Do not these fair yokes
    Become the forest better than the town?
  FORD. Ay, and an ox too; both the proofs are extant.
  FALSTAFF. And these are not fairies? I was three or four
    times in the thought they were not fairies; and yet the
    guiltiness of my mind, the sudden surprise of my powers,
    drove the grossness of the foppery into a receiv'd belief,
    in despite of the teeth of all rhyme and reason, that they
  FALSTAFF. Have I laid my brain in the sun, and dried it, that
  FALSTAFF. 'Seese' and 'putter'! Have I liv'd to stand at the
    to be the decay of lust and late-walking through the realm.
    have thrust virtue out of our hearts by the head and
    that ever the devil could have made you our delight?
  PAGE. Old, cold, wither'd, and of intolerable entrails?
    and wine, and metheglins, and to drinkings, and swearings,
  FALSTAFF. Well, I am your theme; you have the start of me;
    I am dejected; I am not able to answer the Welsh flannel;
    tonight at my house, where I will desire thee to laugh at my
    wife, that now laughs at thee. Tell her Master Slender hath
  SLENDER. Whoa, ho, ho, father Page!
  SLENDER. Dispatch'd! I'll make the best in Gloucestershire
  PAGE. Upon my life, then, you took the wrong.
    is now with the Doctor at the dean'ry, and there married.
  FORD. This is strange. Who hath got the right Anne?
  ANNE. Pardon, good father. Good my mother, pardon.
  FENTON. You do amaze her. Hear the truth of it.
    Where there was no proportion held in love.
    And this deceit loses the name of craft,
    Since therein she doth evitate and shun
    In love, the heavens themselves do guide the state;
  PAGE. Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
  MRS. PAGE. Well, I will muse no further. Master Fenton,
  THESEUS, Duke of Athens
  EGEUS, father to Hermia
  PHILOSTRATE, Master of the Revels to Theseus
  HIPPOLYTA, Queen of the Amazons, bethrothed to Theseus
  OBERON, King of the Fairies
  TITANIA, Queen of the Fairies
  Other Fairies attending their King and Queen
Athens and a wood near it
Athens. The palace of THESEUS
    Another moon; but, O, methinks, how slow
    Long withering out a young man's revenue.
  HIPPOLYTA. Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
    Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
    And then the moon, like to a silver bow
    New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night
    Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments;
    Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth;
    Hippolyta, I woo'd thee with my sword,
    And won thy love doing thee injuries;
    But I will wed thee in another key,
  THESEUS. Thanks, good Egeus; what's the news with thee?
    This man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child.
    And stol'n the impression of her fantasy
    I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:
    Which shall be either to this gentleman
    To you your father should be as a god;
    To leave the figure, or disfigure it.
    But, in this kind, wanting your father's voice,
    The other must be held the worthier.
  HERMIA. I would my father look'd but with my eyes.
  THESEUS. Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
  THESEUS. Either to die the death, or to abjure
    For ever the society of men.
    Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice,
    You can endure the livery of a nun,
    Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
    Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood
    But earthlier happy is the rose distill'd
    Than that which withering on the virgin thorn
  THESEUS. Take time to pause; and by the next new moon-
    Upon that day either prepare to die
    For disobedience to your father's will,
  LYSANDER. You have her father's love, Demetrius;
    And, which is more than all these boasts can be,
    Why should not I then prosecute my right?
    And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
    To fit your fancies to your father's will,
    Or else the law of Athens yields you up-
    How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
    Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.
    But either it was different in blood-
  LYSANDER. Or else it stood upon the choice of friends-
  HERMIA. O hell! to choose love by another's eyes.
  LYSANDER. Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
    Brief as the lightning in the collied night
  HERMIA. If then true lovers have ever cross'd,
  LYSANDER. A good persuasion; therefore, hear me, Hermia.
    From Athens is her house remote seven leagues-
    There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;
    And to that place the sharp Athenian law
    Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then,
    Steal forth thy father's house to-morrow night;
    And in the wood, a league without the town,
    Where I did meet thee once with Helena
    There will I stay for thee.
    I swear to thee by Cupid's strongest bow,
    By his best arrow, with the golden head,
    By the simplicity of Venus' doves,
    And by that fire which burn'd the Carthage Queen,
    When the false Troyan under sail was seen,
    By all the vows that ever men have broke,
    To-morrow truly will I meet with thee.
  HERMIA. God speed fair Helena! Whither away?
    Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
    You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart!
  HERMIA. The more I hate, the more he follows me.
  HELENA. The more I love, the more he hateth me.
    Before the time I did Lysander see,
    Seem'd Athens as a paradise to me.
    O, then, what graces in my love do dwell,
    Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass,
    Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass,
    Through Athens' gates have we devis'd to steal.
  HERMIA. And in the wood where often you and I
    Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
    And thence from Athens turn away our eyes,
    And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!
  HELENA. How happy some o'er other some can be!
    Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
    Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind;
    And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind.
    And therefore is Love said to be a child,
    As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
    So the boy Love is perjur'd everywhere;
    Then to the wood will he to-morrow night
    To have his sight thither and back again.               Exit
Athens. QUINCE'S house
  BOTTOM. You were best to call them generally, man by man, according
    to the scrip.
  QUINCE. Here is the scroll of every man's name which is thought
    fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the Duke
    and the Duchess on his wedding-day at night.
  BOTTOM. First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on; then
    read the names of the actors; and so grow to a point.
    good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll. Masters,
  QUINCE. Answer, as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.
  BOTTOM. That will ask some tears in the true performing of it. If I
    do it, let the audience look to their eyes; I will move storms; I
    will condole in some measure. To the rest- yet my chief humour is
                 Shall break the locks
    This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players. This is
  QUINCE. Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.
  QUINCE. It is the lady that Pyramus must love.
  QUINCE. Robin Starveling, the tailor.
  QUINCE. Robin Starveling, you must play Thisby's mother.
    Tom Snout, the tinker.
  QUINCE. You, Pyramus' father; myself, Thisby's father; Snug, the
    joiner, you, the lion's part. And, I hope, here is a play fitted.
  SNUG. Have you the lion's part written? Pray you, if it be, give it
  BOTTOM. Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will do any
    man's heart good to hear me; I will roar that I will make the
  QUINCE. An you should do it too terribly, you would fright the
    Duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek; and that were
  ALL. That would hang us, every mother's son.
  BOTTOM. I grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies out
    of their wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang us;
    day; a most lovely gentleman-like man; therefore you must needs
  BOTTOM. I will discharge it in either your straw-colour beard, your
  QUINCE. Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then
    I am to entreat you, request you, and desire you, to con them by
    to-morrow night; and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without
    the town, by moonlight; there will we rehearse; for if we meet in
    the city, we shall be dogg'd with company, and our devices known.
    In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties, such as our
  BOTTOM. We will meet; and there we may rehearse most obscenely and
  QUINCE. At the Duke's oak we meet.
A wood near Athens
Enter a FAIRY at One door, and PUCK at another
  PUCK. How now, spirit! whither wander you?
              Swifter than the moon's sphere;
              And I serve the Fairy Queen,
              To dew her orbs upon the green.
              In their gold coats spots you see;
              In those freckles live their savours.
    Take heed the Queen come not within his sight;
    And jealous Oberon would have the child
    Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild;
    But she perforce withholds the loved boy,
    And now they never meet in grove or green,
    But they do square, that all their elves for fear
    Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.
  FAIRY. Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
    That frights the maidens of the villagery,
    Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern,
    And bootless make the breathless housewife churn,
    And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
    Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?
    You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
    I am that merry wanderer of the night.
    And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.
    The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
    And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh,
    And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear
    A merrier hour was never wasted there.
                        at another, with hers
    And in the shape of Corin sat all day,
    Come from the farthest steep of India,
    But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,
    To give their bed joy and prosperity?
    Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering night
  TITANIA. These are the forgeries of jealousy;
    And never, since the middle summer's spring,
    Or in the beached margent of the sea,
    To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
    Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
    As in revenge, have suck'd up from the sea
    Contagious fogs; which, falling in the land,
    That they have overborne their continents.
    The ox hath therefore stretch'd his yoke in vain,
    The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn
    The fold stands empty in the drowned field,
    And crows are fatted with the murrion flock;
    And the quaint mazes in the wanton green,
    The human mortals want their winter here;
    Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
    Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
    Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose;
    Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer,
    Their wonted liveries; and the mazed world,
    By their increase, now knows not which is which.
    We are their parents and original.
  OBERON. Do you amend it, then; it lies in you.
    The fairy land buys not the child of me.
    His mother was a vot'ress of my order;
    And, in the spiced Indian air, by night,
    Marking th' embarked traders on the flood;
    When we have laugh'd to see the sails conceive,
    And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
    Following- her womb then rich with my young squire-
    Would imitate, and sail upon the land,
  OBERON. Give me that boy and I will go with thee.
    Till I torment thee for this injury.
    My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememb'rest
    That the rude sea grew civil at her song,
    And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
    To hear the sea-maid's music.
    Flying between the cold moon and the earth
    At a fair vestal, throned by the west,
    Quench'd in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon;
    And the imperial vot'ress passed on,
    Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell.
    Fetch me that flow'r, the herb I showed thee once.
    Upon the next live creature that it sees.
    Ere the leviathan can swim a league.
  PUCK. I'll put a girdle round about the earth
    And drop the liquor of it in her eyes;
    The next thing then she waking looks upon,
    She shall pursue it with the soul of love.
    As I can take it with another herb,
    And I will overhear their conference.
  DEMETRIUS. I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.
    The one I'll slay, the other slayeth me.
    Thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood,
    Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
    Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth
  HELENA. And even for that do I love you the more.
  DEMETRIUS. Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit;
    For I am sick when I do look on thee.
    To leave the city and commit yourself
    Into the hands of one that loves you not;
    To trust the opportunity of night,
    And the ill counsel of a desert place,
    With the rich worth of your virginity.
    Therefore I think I am not in the night;
    For you, in my respect, are all the world.
    When all the world is here to look on me?
  DEMETRIUS. I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,
    And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.
    Run when you will; the story shall be chang'd:
    Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase;
    The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind
    Makes speed to catch the tiger- bootless speed,
    But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.
  HELENA. Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
    I'll follow thee, and make a heaven of hell,
    To die upon the hand I love so well.             Exit HELENA
  OBERON. Fare thee well, nymph; ere he do leave this grove,
    Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.
  PUCK. Ay, there it is.
  OBERON. I pray thee give it me.
    I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,
    Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
    There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
    Lull'd in these flowers with dances and delight;
    And there the snake throws her enamell'd skin,
    And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes,
    A sweet Athenian lady is in love
    But do it when the next thing he espies
    May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man
    By the Athenian garments he hath on.
    And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.
Another part of the wood
    Then, for the third part of a minute, hence:
    Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds;
    Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings,
      Enter OBERON and squeezes the flower on TITANIA'S eyelids
  LYSANDER. Fair love, you faint with wand'ring in the wood;
    And tarry for the comfort of the day.
    Lie further off yet; do not lie so near.
  LYSANDER. O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
    Love takes the meaning in love's conference.
    So then two bosoms and a single troth.
    Lie further off, in human modesty;
    And then end life when I end loyalty!
    Here is my bed; sleep give thee all his rest!
  HERMIA. With half that wish the wisher's eyes be press'd!
  PUCK.      Through the forest have I gone,
             But Athenian found I none
             Weeds of Athens he doth wear:
             Despised the Athenian maid;
             And here the maiden, sleeping sound,
             On the dank and dirty ground.
             All the power this charm doth owe:
  DEMETRIUS. I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.
    The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
    But who is here? Lysander! on the ground!
    Yet Hermia still loves you; then be content.
    And reason says you are the worthier maid.
    Things growing are not ripe until their season;
    And touching now the point of human skill,
    Reason becomes the marshal to my will,
    Should of another therefore be abus'd!                  Exit
  LYSANDER. She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there;
    For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
    The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,
    Or as the heresies that men do leave
    Are hated most of those they did deceive,
    Of all be hated, but the most of me!
    Either death or you I'll find immediately.              Exit
    do it before the Duke.
    himself; which the ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?
  STARVELING. I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is
    prologue; and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm
    the more better assurance, tell them that I Pyramus am not
    Pyramus but Bottom the weaver. This will put them out of fear.
  SNOUT. Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?
    there is not a more fearful wild-fowl than your lion living; and
  SNOUT. Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.
    through the lion's neck; and he himself must speak through,
    saying thus, or to the same defect: 'Ladies,' or 'Fair ladies, I
    come hither as a lion, it were pity of my life. No, I am no such
    thing; I am a man as other men are.' And there, indeed, let him
    name his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.
  QUINCE. Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things- that
    is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber; for, you know, Pyramus
  SNOUT. Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?
  BOTTOM. A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanack; find out
  BOTTOM. Why, then may you leave a casement of the great chamber
    window, where we play, open; and the moon may shine in at the
    lantern, and say he comes to disfigure or to present the person
    of Moonshine. Then there is another thing: we must have a wall in
    the great chamber; for Pyramus and Thisby, says the story, did
    talk through the chink of a wall.
  BOTTOM. Some man or other must present Wall; and let him have some
  QUINCE. If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down, every
    mother's son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus, you begin; when
    So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?
  BOTTOM. Thisby, the flowers of odious savours sweet-
    And by and by I will to thee appear.                    Exit
    Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier,
    I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb.
  BOTTOM. Why do they run away? This is a knavery of them to make me
  SNOUT. O Bottom, thou art chang'd! What do I see on thee?
  QUINCE. Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! Thou art translated.
  BOTTOM. I see their knavery: this is to make an ass of me; to
    fright me, if they could. But I will not stir from this place, do
    what they can; I will walk up and down here, and will sing, that
    they shall hear I am not afraid.                     [Sings]
          The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
    Who would give a bird the he, though he cry 'cuckoo' never so?
  TITANIA. I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.
    On the first view, to say, to swear, I love thee.
    And yet, to say the truth, reason and love keep little company
    together now-a-days. The more the pity that some honest
    neighbours will not make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon
  BOTTOM. Not so, neither; but if I had wit enough to get out of this
    Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.
    And I do love thee; therefore, go with me.
    I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee;
    And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,
    The honey bags steal from the humble-bees,
    And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs,
    And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes,
    And pluck the wings from painted butterflies,
    To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
  BOTTOM. I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother, and
    to Master Peascod, your father. Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall
Another part of the wood
    That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
    Were met together to rehearse a play
    Who Pyramus presented, in their sport
    And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
    As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
    Rising and cawing at the gun's report,
    Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
    He murder cries, and help from Athens calls.
    Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong,
    Made senseless things begin to do them wrong,
    For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch;
    I led them on in this distracted fear,
    And left sweet Pyramus translated there;
    But hast thou yet latch'd the Athenian's eyes
    With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do?
    And the Athenian woman by his side;
  OBERON. Stand close; this is the same Athenian.
  PUCK. This is the woman, but not this the man.
  HERMIA. Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
    Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep,
    The sun was not so true unto the day
    This whole earth may be bor'd, and that the moon
    May through the centre creep and so displease
    Her brother's noontide with th' Antipodes.
  DEMETRIUS. So should the murdered look; and so should I,
    Pierc'd through the heart with your stern cruelty;
    Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
  DEMETRIUS. I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
  HERMIA. Out, dog! out, cur! Thou driv'st me past the bounds
    Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
  HERMIA. I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.
  DEMETRIUS. An if I could, what should I get therefore?
    See me no more whether he be dead or no.                Exit
    Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
    And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight.
  OBERON. About the wood go swifter than the wind,
    And Helena of Athens look thou find;
    With sighs of love that costs the fresh blood dear.
    Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.               Exit
                As the Venus of the sky.
                And the youth mistook by me
                Shall we their fond pageant see?
                Lord, what fools these mortals be!
  OBERON.       Stand aside. The noise they make
    In their nativity all truth appears.
    How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
    Bearing the badge of faith, to prove them true?
    Fann'd with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
  DEMETRIUS. Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
  HERMIA. Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
    Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
    It pays the hearing double recompense.
    Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
    Why seek'st thou me? Could not this make thee know
    The hate I bare thee made me leave thee so?
    Now I perceive they have conjoin'd all three
    Have you conspir'd, have you with these contriv'd,
    Is all the counsel that we two have shar'd,
    The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent,
    When we have chid the hasty-footed time
    Had been incorporate. So we grew together,
    Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
    Though I alone do feel the injury.
    And made your other love, Demetrius,
    This you should pity rather than despise.
    Wink each at other; hold the sweet jest up;
    Helen, I love thee, by my life I do;
    I swear by that which I will lose for thee
    To prove him false that says I love thee not.
  DEMETRIUS. I say I love thee more than he can do.
    Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.
    Out, loathed med'cine! O hated potion, hence!
  LYSANDER. Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.
    Why then, you left me- O, the gods forbid!-
    And never did desire to see thee more.
    That I do hate thee and love Helena.
  HERMIA. 'Puppet!' why so? Ay, that way goes the game.
    To Athens will I bear my folly back,
    And follow you no further. Let me go.
  LYSANDER. Be not afraid; she shall not harm thee, Helena.
  DEMETRIUS. Follow! Nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
    Did not you tell me I should know the man
    By the Athenian garments he had on?
    That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes;
    As this their jangling I esteem a sport.
  OBERON. Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
    Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
    And lead these testy rivals so astray
    As one come not within another's way.
    And from each other look thou lead them thus,
    Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
    To take from thence all error with his might
    When they next wake, all this derision
    And back to Athens shall the lovers wend
    Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
    And then I will her charmed eye release
    For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast;
    At whose approach ghosts, wand'ring here and there,
    Already to their wormy beds are gone,
    For fear lest day should look their shames upon;
    They wilfully themselves exil'd from light,
  OBERON. But we are spirits of another sort:
    I with the Morning's love have oft made sport;
    And, like a forester, the groves may tread
    Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red,
             I will lead them up and down.
             Goblin, lead them up and down.
  LYSANDER. I will be with thee straight.
  PUCK. Follow me, then,
    To plainer ground.      Exit LYSANDER as following the voice
  PUCK. Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
    Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars,
    I'll whip thee with a rod. He is defil'd
    That draws a sword on thee.
  DEMETRIUS. Yea, art thou there?
    When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
    And dar'st not stand, nor look me in the face.
  PUCK. Come hither; I am here.
  DEMETRIUS. Nay, then, thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this dear,
    Abate thy hours! Shine comforts from the east,
    That I may back to Athens by daylight,
    From these that my poor company detest.
    Bedabbled with the dew, and torn with briers,
    I can no further crawl, no further go;
    Here will I rest me till the break of day.
    Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray!
  PUCK.          On the ground
                        [Squeezing the juice on LYSANDER'S eyes]
                 In the sight
          And the country proverb known,
and other FAIRIES attending;
  TITANIA. Come, sit thee down upon this flow'ry bed,
    your hand and kill me a red-hipp'd humble-bee on the top of a
    thistle; and, good mounsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not fret
    yourself too much in the action, mounsieur; and, good mounsieur,
    have a care the honey-bag break not; I would be loath to have you
    scratch. I must to the barber's, mounsieur; for methinks I am
    marvellous hairy about the face; and I am such a tender ass, if
  BOTTOM. I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let's have the tongs
    and the bones.
    The squirrel's hoard, and fetch thee new nuts.
  BOTTOM. I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But, I
  TITANIA. Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.
    So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
    Gently entwist; the female ivy so
    Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
    O, how I love thee! how I dote on thee!         [They sleep]
    For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
    For she his hairy temples then had rounded
    And that same dew which sometime on the buds
    Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes,
    Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
    I then did ask of her her changeling child;
    And now I have the boy, I will undo
    From off the head of this Athenian swain,
    That he awaking when the other do
    May all to Athens back again repair,
    But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
    But first I will release the Fairy Queen.
  TITANIA. How came these things to pass?
    O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!
    Than common sleep of all these five the sense.
    And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
    There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
              I do hear the morning lark.
              We the globe can compass soon,
              Swifter than the wand'ring moon.
              With these mortals on the ground.           Exeunt
        To the winding of horns, enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA,
  THESEUS. Go, one of you, find out the forester;
    And since we have the vaward of the day,
    My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
    Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.
    Dispatch, I say, and find the forester.    Exit an ATTENDANT
    We will, fair Queen, up to the mountain's top,
    And mark the musical confusion
    When in a wood of Crete they bay'd the bear
    Such gallant chiding, for, besides the groves,
    The skies, the fountains, every region near
  THESEUS. My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
    So flew'd, so sanded; and their heads are hung
    With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
    Judge when you hear. But, soft, what nymphs are these?
    I wonder of their being here together.
  THESEUS. No doubt they rose up early to observe
    But speak, Egeus; is not this the day
  THESEUS. Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.
    Begin these wood-birds but to couple now?
    How comes this gentle concord in the world
    I came with Hermia hither. Our intent
    Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,
    Without the peril of the Athenian law-
    I beg the law, the law upon his head.
    They would have stol'n away, they would, Demetrius,
  DEMETRIUS. My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
    Of this their purpose hither to this wood;
    And I in fury hither followed them,
    Melted as the snow, seems to me now
    As the remembrance of an idle gaud
    And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
    The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
    But, like a sickness, did I loathe this food;
    For in the temple, by and by, with us
    And, for the morning now is something worn,
    Away with us to Athens, three and three;
  HERMIA. Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
  HERMIA. Yea, and my father.
  LYSANDER. And he did bid us follow to the temple.
  DEMETRIUS. Why, then, we are awake; let's follow him;
    And by the way let us recount our dreams.             Exeunt
    next is 'Most fair Pyramus.' Heigh-ho! Peter Quince! Flute, the
    bellows-mender! Snout, the tinker! Starveling! God's my life,
    I have had a dream, past the wit of man to say what dream it was.
    I was- there is no man can tell what. Methought I was, and
    to say what methought I had. The eye of man hath not heard, the
    sing it in the latter end of a play, before the Duke.
    Peradventure, to make it the more gracious, I shall sing it at
Athens. QUINCE'S house
  FLUTE. If he come not, then the play is marr'd; it goes not
  QUINCE. It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens able
  FLUTE. No; he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in
    Athens.
  QUINCE. Yea, and the best person too; and he is a very paramour for
  SNUG. Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple; and there is two
    during his life; he could not have scaped sixpence a day. An the
  BOTTOM. Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?
    for if I tell you, I am not true Athenian. I will tell you
  BOTTOM. Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, that the
    Duke hath dined. Get your apparel together; good strings to your
    beards, new ribbons to your pumps; meet presently at the palace;
    every man look o'er his part; for the short and the long is, our
    let not him that plays the lion pare his nails, for they shall
    hang out for the lion's claws. And, most dear actors, eat no
    doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy. No more words.
Athens. The palace of THESEUS
  HIPPOLYTA. 'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.
    These antique fables, nor these fairy toys.
    The lunatic, the lover, and the poet,
    That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic,
    The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
    Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
    Or in the night, imagining some fear,
  HIPPOLYTA. But all the story of the night told over,
    And all their minds transfigur'd so together,
  THESEUS. Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.
    What revels are in hand? Is there no play
    To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
  THESEUS. 'The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
    By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.'
    'The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,
    Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage.'
    'The thrice three Muses mourning for the death
    How shall we find the concord of this discord?
  PHILOSTRATE. A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
    Which makes it tedious; for in all the play
    For Pyramus therein doth kill himself.
  THESEUS. What are they that do play it?
  PHILOSTRATE. Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
    Which never labour'd in their minds till now;
    And now have toil'd their unbreathed memories
    And it is nothing, nothing in the world;
    Unless you can find sport in their intents,
    Go, bring them in; and take your places, ladies.
  HIPPOLYTA. He says they can do nothing in this kind.
  THESEUS. The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
    Our sport shall be to take what they mistake;
    Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
    Make periods in the midst of sentences,
    Throttle their practis'd accent in their fears,
    And in the modesty of fearful duty
    I read as much as from the rattling tongue
    Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
  PHILOSTRATE. SO please your Grace, the Prologue is address'd.
                 Enter QUINCE as the PROLOGUE
    That is the true beginning of our end.
    Consider then, we come but in despite.
    The actors are at band; and, by their show,
    the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak, but
          Enter, with a trumpet before them, as in dumb show,
    Wall, that vile Wall which did these lovers sunder;
    And through Walls chink, poor souls, they are content
    To whisper. At the which let no man wonder.
    By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
    To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo.
    Did scare away, or rather did affright;
    His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
    At large discourse while here they do remain.
  THESEUS. I wonder if the lion be to speak.
    Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisby,
    That I am that same wall; the truth is so;
    And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
    Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.
  DEMETRIUS. It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard
  THESEUS. Pyramus draws near the wall; silence.
    That stand'st between her father's ground and mine;
    Thanks, courteous wall. Jove shield thee well for this!
    cue. She is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the wall.
    Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.
  PYRAMUS. I see a voice; now will I to the chink,
  THISBY. And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.
  PYRAMUS. O, kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.
  THISBY. I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.
  THESEUS. Now is the moon used between the two neighbours.
  HIPPOLYTA. This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.
  THESEUS. The best in this kind are but shadows; and the worst are
    no worse, if imagination amend them.
  HIPPOLYTA. It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.
  THESEUS. If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves,
    they may pass for excellent men. Here come two noble beasts in, a
    Then know that I as Snug the joiner am
    discretion, and the fox carries the goose.
    the goose carries not the fox. It is well. Leave it to his
    discretion, and let us listen to the Moon.
  MOONSHINE. This lanthorn doth the horned moon present-
  DEMETRIUS. He should have worn the horns on his head.
  THESEUS. He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the
  MOONSHINE. This lanthorn doth the horned moon present;
    Myself the Man i' th' Moon do seem to be.
  THESEUS. This is the greatest error of all the rest; the man should
    be put into the lantern. How is it else the man i' th' moon?
  DEMETRIUS. He dares not come there for the candle; for, you see, it
    in the wane; but yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay
    the time.
  MOON. All that I have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn is
    the moon; I, the Man i' th' Moon; this thorn-bush, my thorn-bush;
  DEMETRIUS. Why, all these should be in the lantern; for all these
    are in the moon. But silence; here comes Thisby.
  HIPPOLYTA. Well shone, Moon. Truly, the moon shines with a good
  DEMETRIUS. And then came Pyramus.
  LYSANDER. And so the lion vanish'd.
  PYRAMUS. Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams;
    I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright;
  THESEUS. This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would go
  HIPPOLYTA. Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.
    Which is- no, no- which was the fairest dame
           My soul is in the sky.
  THESEUS. With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and yet
    passion ends the play.
  DEMETRIUS. A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which
    Thisby, is the better- he for a man, God warrant us: She for a
               Lay them in gore,
  THESEUS. Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.
  BOTTOM. [Starting up] No, I assure you; the wall is down that
    parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the Epilogue, or
    Never excuse; for when the players are all dead there need none
    I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn,
  PUCK.      Now the hungry lion roars,
             And the wolf behowls the moon;
             Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
             Now the wasted brands do glow,
             Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
             Puts the wretch that lies in woe
             Now it is the time of night
             That the graves, all gaping wide,
             In the church-way paths to glide.
             By the triple Hecate's team
             From the presence of the sun,
             To sweep the dust behind the door.
         Enter OBERON and TITANIA, with all their train
  OBERON.    Through the house give glimmering light,
             By the dead and drowsy fire;
           [OBERON leading, the FAIRIES sing and dance]
  OBERON.    Now, until the break of day,
             To the best bride-bed will we,
             And the issue there create
             So shall all the couples three
             And the blots of Nature's hand
             Shall not in their issue stand;
             Shall upon their children be.
             And the owner of it blest
             While these visions did appear.
             And this weak and idle theme,
             Now to scape the serpent's tongue,
             Else the Puck a liar call.
  Don John, his bastard brother.
  Antonio, an old man, his brother.
  Leon. A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full
    Pedro. He hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing
    in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion. He hath indeed
  Mess. I have already delivered him letters, and there appears much
  Beat. I pray you, is Signior Mountanto return'd from the wars or no?
  Mess. I know none of that name, lady. There was none such in the
    the flight, and my uncle's fool, reading the challenge,
    subscrib'd for Cupid and challeng'd him at the burbolt. I pray
    you, how many hath he kill'd and eaten in these wars? But how
  Mess. He hath done good service, lady, in these wars.
    the stuffing--well, we are all mortal.
    war betwixt Signior Benedick and her. They never meet but there's
    a skirmish of wit between them.
    his five wits went halting off, and now is the whole man govern'd
    it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reasonable
    sworn brother.
  Beat. Very easily possible. He wears his faith but as the fashion
    of his hat; it ever changes with the next block.
  Mess. I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.
    his companion? Is there no young squarer now that will make a
    voyage with him to the devil?
  Mess. He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.
    caught than the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad. God
    help the noble Claudio! If he have caught the Benedick, it will
  Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, Balthasar, and John the Bastard.
    fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it.
  Leon. Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your Grace;
  Leon. Her mother hath many times told me so.
  Leon. Signior Benedick, no; for then were you a child.
    are, being a man. Truly the lady fathers herself. Be happy, lady;
    for you are like an honourable father.
  Bene. If Signior Leonato be her father, she would not have his head
    your humour for that. I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow
    or other shall scape a predestinate scratch'd face.
  Bene. I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and so good a
  Pedro. That is the sum of all, Leonato. Signior Claudio and Signior
    we shall stay here at the least a month, and he heartly prays
    John] Let me bid you welcome, my lord. Being reconciled to the
    Prince your brother, I owe you all duty.
  Pedro. Your hand, Leonato. We will go together.
  Claud. Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato?
    being a professed tyrant to their sex?
  Claud. No. I pray thee speak in sober judgment.
    Only this commendation I can afford her, that were she other
    than she is, she were unhandsome, and being no other but as she
  Claud. Thou thinkest I am in sport. I pray thee tell me truly how
  Claud. Can the world buy such a jewel?
    brow? or do you play the flouting Jack, to tell us Cupid is a
    shall a man take you to go in the song?
  Claud. In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I look'd on.
    her as much in beauty as the first of May doth the last of
  Claud. I would scarce trust myself, though I had sworn the
  Bene. Is't come to this? In faith, hath not the world one man but
    thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear the print of it and sigh away
  Pedro. I charge thee on thy allegiance.
  Bene. Like the old tale, my lord: 'It is not so, nor 'twas not so;
    otherwise.
  Pedro. Amen, if you love her; for the lady is very well worthy.
  Bene. That I neither feel how she should be loved, nor know how she
    should be worthy, is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me.
    I will die in it at the stake.
  Pedro. Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of
  Claud. And never could maintain his part but in the force of his
    baldrick, all women shall pardon me. Because I will not do them
    the wrong to mistrust any, I will do myself the right to trust
    none; and the fine is (for the which I may go the finer), I will
  Pedro. I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.
    and hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the sign of
    he that hits me, let him be clapp'd on the shoulder and call'd
    'In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.'
  Bene. The savage bull may; but if ever the sensible Benedick bear
    it, pluck off the bull's horns and set them in my forehead, and
    let me be vilely painted, and in such great letters as they write
    'Here is good horse to hire,' let them signify under my sign
    'Here you may see Benedick the married man.'
  Bene. I look for an earthquake too then.
  Pedro. Well, you will temporize with the hours. In the meantime,
  Claud. To the tuition of God. From my house--if I had it--
    sometime guarded with fragments, and the guards are but slightly
    basted on neither. Ere you flout old ends any further, examine
    Any hard lesson that may do thee good.
    Than to drive liking to the name of love;
    Have left their places vacant, in their rooms
    And tire the hearer with a book of words.
    And I will break with her and with her father,
  Pedro. What need the bridge much broader than the flood?
    The fairest grant is the necessity.
    And I will fit thee with the remedy.
    And take her hearing prisoner with the force
    Then after to her father will I break,
    And the conclusion is, she shall be thine.
Enter [at one door] Leonato and [at another door, Antonio] an old man,
brother to Leonato.
  Leon. How now, brother? Where is my cousin your son? Hath he
  Ant. He is very busy about it. But, brother, I can tell you strange
  Leon. Are they good?
  Ant. As the event stamps them; but they have a good cover, they
    a man of mine: the Prince discovered to Claudio that he loved my
    dance, and if he found her accordant, he meant to take the
    present time by the top and instantly break with you of it.
  Leon. Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?
    I will acquaint my daughter withal, that she may be the better
         [Enter Antonio's Son with a Musician, and others.]
    [To the Son] Cousin, you know what you have to do.
    --[To the Musician] O, I cry you mercy, friend. Go you with me,
Another room in Leonato's house.]
Enter Sir John the Bastard and Conrade, his companion.
  Con. What the goodyear, my lord! Why are you thus out of measure
  John. There is no measure in the occasion that breeds; therefore
    the sadness is without limit.
  Con. Yea, but you must not make the full show of this till you may
    your brother, and he hath ta'en you newly into his grace, where
    it is impossible you should take true root but by the fair
    weather that you make yourself. It is needful that you frame the
  John. I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace,
    enfranchis'd with a clog; therefore I have decreed not to sing in
    would do my liking. In the meantime let me be that I am, and seek
  Bora. I came yonder from a great supper. The Prince your brother is
  Bora. Marry, it is your brother's right hand.
  John. Who? the most exquisite Claudio?
  Bora. Marry, on Hero, the daughter and heir of Leonato.
    room, comes me the Prince and Claudio, hand in hand in sad
    conference. I whipt me behind the arras and there heard it agreed
    upon that the Prince should woo Hero for himself, and having
  John. Come, come, let us thither. This may prove food to my
    displeasure. That young start-up hath all the glory of my
  Con. To the death, my lord.
  John. Let us to the great supper. Their cheer is the greater that
    I am subdued. Would the cook were o' my mind! Shall we go prove
Enter Leonato, [Antonio] his Brother, Hero his Daughter,
  Beat. He were an excellent man that were made just in the midway
    nothing, and the other too like my lady's eldest son, evermore
    his purse, such a man would win any woman in the world--if 'a
  Leon. By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband if
  Beat. Just, if he send me no husband; for the which blessing I am
    endure a husband with a beard on his face. I had rather lie in
    the woollen!
    earnest of the berrord and lead his apes into hell.
  Leon. Well then, go you into hell?
  Beat. No; but to the gate, and there will the devil meet me like an
    deliver I up my apes, and away to Saint Peter--for the heavens.
    He shows me where the bachelors sit, and there live we as merry
    as the day is long.
    father.
    'Father, as it please you.' But yet for all that, cousin, let him
    be a handsome fellow, or else make another cursy, and say,
    'Father, as it please me.'
  Beat. Not till God make men of some other metal than earth. Would
  Leon. Daughter, remember what I told you. If the Prince do solicit
  Beat. The fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be not wooed
    in good time. If the Prince be too important, tell him there is
    measure in everything, and so dance out the answer. For, hear me,
    measure, and a cinque-pace: the first suit is hot and hasty like
    a Scotch jig--and full as fantastical; the wedding, mannerly
    modest, as a measure, full of state and ancientry; and then comes
    Repentance and with his bad legs falls into the cinque-pace
  Leon. The revellers are ent'ring, brother. Make good room.
       [With them enter Antonio, also masked. After them enter]
                 and look on during the dance].
    I am yours for the walk; and especially when I walk away.
  Hero. When I like your favour, for God defend the lute should be
    like the case!
  Pedro. My visor is Philemon's roof; within the house is Jove.
  Hero. Why then, your visor should be thatch'd.
  Balth. I love you the better. The hearers may cry Amen.
  Marg. And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is done!
  Urs. I know you by the waggling of your head.
  Urs. You could never do him so ill-well unless you were the very
    appear, and there's an end.              [ They step aside.]
  Beat. That I was disdainful, and that I had my good wit out of the
  Beat. Why, he is the Prince's jester, a very dull fool. Only his
    delight in him; and the commendation is not in his wit, but in
    his villany; for he both pleases men and angers them, and then
    they laugh at him and beat him. I am sure he is in the fleet.
  Bene. When I know the gentleman, I'll tell him what you say.
    melancholy; and then there's a partridge wing saved, for the fool
    We must follow the leaders.
  Beat. Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at the next
  John. Sure my brother is amorous on Hero and hath withdrawn her
    father to break with him about it. The ladies follow her and but
  John. Signior, you are very near my brother in his love. He is
    equal for his birth. You may do the part of an honest man in it.
  John. Come, let us to the banquet.
    But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio.
    Friendship is constant in all other things
    Save in the office and affairs of love.
    Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues;
    Which I mistrusted not. Farewell therefore Hero!
  Claud. Yea, the same.
  Claud. Whither?
  Bene. Even to the next willow, about your own business, County. What
    fashion will you wear the garland of? about your neck, like an
    must wear it one way, for the Prince hath got your Hero.
  Bene. Why, that's spoken like an honest drovier. So they sell
    bullocks. But did you think the Prince would have served you
  Bene. Ho! now you strike like the blind man! 'Twas the boy that
    stole your meat, and you'll beat the post.
    reputed. It is the base (though bitter) disposition of Beatrice
    that puts the world into her person and so gives me out. Well,
  Pedro. Now, signior, where's the Count? Did you see him?
  Bene. Troth, my lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame, I found
    think I told him true, that your Grace had got the good will of
    either to make him a garland, as being forsaken, or to bind him
    in the stealer.
  Bene. Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the
    garland too; for the garland he might have worn himself, and the
  Pedro. I will but teach them to sing and restore them to the owner.
  Bene. If their singing answer your saying, by my faith you say
  Bene. O, she misus'd me past the endurance of a block! An oak but
    thinking I had been myself, that I was the Prince's jester, that
    there were no living near her; she would infect to the North
    the fire too. Come, talk not of her. You shall find her the
    because they would go thither; so indeed all disquiet, horror,
  Bene. Will your Grace command me any service to the world's end? I
    will go on the slightest errand now to the Antipodes that you can
    devise to send me on; I will fetch you a toothpicker now from the
    furthest inch of Asia; bring you the length of Prester John's
    foot; fetch you a hair off the great Cham's beard; do you any
    embassage to the Pygmies--rather than hold three words'
  Pedro. Come, lady, come; you have lost the heart of Signior
    it of me with false dice; therefore your Grace may well say I
    the mother of fools. I have brought Count Claudio, whom you sent
  Pedro. How then? sick?
  Claud. Neither, my lord.
  Beat. The Count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well; but
    her father, and his good will obtained. Name the day of marriage,
    and God give thee joy!
    Grace hath made the match, and all grace say Amen to it!
  Claud. Silence is the perfectest herald of joy. I were but little
    I give away myself for you and dote upon the exchange.
    and let not him speak neither.
  Beat. Yea, my lord; I thank it, poor fool, it keeps on the windy
  Beat. Good Lord, for alliance! Thus goes every one to the world but
  Beat. I would rather have one of your father's getting. Hath your
    Grace ne'er a brother like you? Your father got excellent
    husbands, if a maid could come by them.
  Beat. No, my lord, unless I might have another for working days:
  Beat. No, sure, my lord, my mother cried; but then there was a star
  Leon. There's little of the melancholy element in her, my lord. She
    is never sad but when she sleeps, and not ever sad then; for I
  Leon. O Lord, my lord! if they were but a week married, they would
    talk themselves mad.
  Pedro. Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing;
    but I warrant thee, Claudio, the time shall not go dully by us.
    I will in the interim undertake one of Hercules' labours, which
    is, to bring Signior Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a
    mountain of affection th' one with th' other. I would fain have
  Pedro. And Benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that I know.
    the only love-gods. Go in with me, and I will tell you my drift.
  John. It is so. The Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of
    the favour of Margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to Hero.
  Bora. I can, at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her
  John. What life is in that to be the death of this marriage?
  Bora. The poison of that lies in you to temper. Go you to the
    Prince your brother; spare not to tell him that he hath wronged
    his honour in marrying the renowned Claudio (whose estimation do
  Bora. Proof enough to misuse the Prince, to vex Claudio, to undo
    Hero, and kill Leonato. Look you for any other issue?
  John. Only to despite them I will endeavour anything.
  Bora. Go then; find me a meet hour to draw Don Pedro and the Count
    Claudio alone; tell them that you know that Hero loves me; intend
    a kind of zeal both to the Prince and Claudio, as--in love of
    your brother's honour, who hath made this match, and his friend's
    reputation, who is thus like to be cozen'd with the semblance of
    this without trial. Offer them instances; which shall bear no
    call Margaret Hero, hear Margaret term me Claudio; and bring them
    to see this the very night before the intended wedding (for in
    the meantime I will so fashion the matter that Hero shall be
    absent) and there shall appear such seeming truth of Hero's
    disloyalty that jealousy shall be call'd assurance and all the
    practice. Be cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a
  Bora. Be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning shall not
  John. I will presently go learn their day of marriage.
  Bene. In my chamber window lies a book. Bring it hither to me in
    the orchard.
  Bene. I know that, but I would have thee hence and here again.
    another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviours to love,
    will, after he hath laugh'd at such shallow follies in others,
    become the argument of his own scorn by falling in love; and such
    a man is Claudio. I have known when there was no music with him
    but the drum and the fife; and now had he rather hear the tabor
    and the pipe. I have known when he would have walk'd ten mile
    carving the fashion of a new doublet. He was wont to speak plain
    and to the purpose, like an honest man and a soldier; and now is
    these eyes? I cannot tell; I think not. I will not be sworn but
    fool. One woman is fair, yet I am well; another is wise, yet I am
    well; another virtuous, yet I am well; but till all graces be in
    please God. Ha, the Prince and Monsieur Love! I will hide me in
    the arbour.                                         [Hides.]
  Claud. Yea, my good lord. How still the evening is,
    We'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.
  Pedro. It is the witness still of excellency
    I pray thee sing, and let me woo no more.
  Pedro. Nay, pray thee come;
    There's not a note of mine that's worth the noting.
  Pedro. Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks!
            But let them go,
          And be you blithe and bonny,
    they would have hang'd him; and I pray God his bad voice bode no
    mischief. I had as live have heard the night raven, come what
  Pedro. Yea, marry. Dost thou hear, Balthasar? I pray thee get us
    some excellent music; for to-morrow night we would have it at the
    Come hither, Leonato. What was it you told me of to-day? that
  Claud. O, ay!-[Aside to Pedro] Stalk on, stalk on; the fowl sits.
  Leon. No, nor I neither; but most wonderful that she should so dote
  Bene. [aside] Is't possible? Sits the wind in that corner?
    that she loves him with an enraged affection. It is past the
    came so near the life of passion as she discovers it.
  Claud. [aside] Bait the hook well! This fish will bite.
  Bene. [aside] I should think this a gull but that the white-bearded
    she'll be up twenty times a night, and there will she sit in her
    'Benedick' and 'Beatrice' between the sheet?
  Leon. O, she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence, rail'd at
  Leon. She doth indeed; my daughter says so. And the ecstasy hath so
  Pedro. It were good that Benedick knew of it by some other, if she
  Claud. To what end? He would make but a sport of it and torment the
    we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory. I am sorry
    daff'd all other respects and made her half myself. I pray you
    and she will die, if he woo her, rather than she will bate one
    very possible he'll scorn it; for the man (as you know all) hath
  Pedro. As Hector, I assure you; and in the managing of quarrels you
    may say he is wise, for either he avoids them with great
    discretion, or undertakes them with a most Christianlike fear.
    break the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and
  Pedro. And so will he do; for the man doth fear God, howsoever it
  Pedro. Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter. Let it
    cool the while. I love Benedick well, and I could wish he would
  Pedro. Let there be the same net spread for her, and that must your
    daughter and her gentlewomen carry. The sport will be, when they
    hold one an opinion of another's dotage, and no such matter.
    That's the scene that I would see, which will be merely a dumb
                [Benedick advances from the arbour.]
  Bene. This can be no trick. The conference was sadly borne; they
    have the truth of this from Hero; they seem to pity the lady.
    It seems her affections have their full bent. Love me? Why, it
    myself proudly if I perceive the love come from her. They say too
    that she will rather die than give any sign of affection. I did
    never think to marry. I must not seem proud. Happy are they that
    hear their detractions and can put them to mending. They say the
    lady is fair--'tis a truth, I can bear them witness; and virtuous
    have railed so long against marriage. But doth not the appetite
    alters? A man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot endure
    in his age. Shall quips and sentences and these paper bullets of
    the brain awe a man from the career of his humour? No, the world
  Bene. You take pleasure then in the message?
  Hero. Good Margaret, run thee to the parlour.
    Proposing with the Prince and Claudio.
    Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse
    And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
    Where honeysuckles, ripened by the sun,
    Forbid the sun to enter--like favourites,
    Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
    Bear thee well in it and leave us alone.
    My talk to thee must be how Benedick
    Close by the ground, to hear our conference.
               [Beatrice hides in the arbour].
  Urs. The pleasant'st angling is to see the fish
    Cut with her golden oars the silver stream
    And greedily devour the treacherous bait.
    Is couched in the woodbine coverture.
    Fear you not my part of the dialogue.
    Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it.
                                     [They approach the arbour.]
    As haggards of the rock.
  Hero. So says the Prince, and my new-trothed lord.
  Urs. And did they bid you tell her of it, madam?
    But I persuaded them, if they lov'd Benedick,
  Urs. Why did you so? Doth not the gentleman
    Misprizing what they look on; and her wit
    And therefore certainly it were not good
    She would swear the gentleman should be her sister;
    So turns she every man the wrong side out
  Hero. No; rather I will go to Benedick
  Hero. He is the only man of Italy,
    I'll show thee some attires, and have thy counsel
    Which is the best to furnish me to-morrow.
  Hero. If it prove so, then loving goes by haps;
    [Beatrice advances from the arbour.]
    No glory lives behind the back of such.
    And, Benedick, love on; I will requite thee,
    If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
    For others say thou dost deserve, and I
  Pedro. I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go
  Claud. I'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll vouchsafe me.
  Pedro. Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your
    the crown of his head to the sole of his foot, he is all mirth.
    He hath twice or thrice cut Cupid's bowstring, and the little
    bell; and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks,
  Bene. I have the toothache.
  Pedro. What? sigh for the toothache?
    Frenchman to-morrow; or in the shape of two countries at once, as
    a German from the waist downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from
    the hip upward, no doublet. Unless he have a fancy to this
  Claud. If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing
  Pedro. Hath any man seen him at the barber's?
  Claud. No, but the barber's man hath been seen with him, and the
  Leon. Indeed he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.
  Claud. That's as much as to say, the sweet youth's in love.
  Pedro. Yea, or to paint himself? for the which I hear what they say
  Bene. Yet is this no charm for the toothache. Old signior, walk
    to you, which these hobby-horses must not hear.
  Claud. 'Tis even so. Hero and Margaret have by this played their
    parts with Beatrice, and then the two bears will not bite one
    another when they meet.
                 Enter John the Bastard.
  John. My lord and brother, God save you.
  Pedro. Good den, brother.
  Pedro. What's the matter?
  Claud. If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.
    aim better at me by that I now will manifest. For my brother, I
  Pedro. Why, what's the matter?
  John. I came hither to tell you, and, circumstances short'ned (for
    she has been too long a-talking of), the lady is disloyal.
    it. Wonder not till further warrant. Go but with me to-night, you
    shall see her chamber window ent'red, even the night before her
    wedding day. If you love her then, to-morrow wed her. But it
    to-morrow, in the congregation where I should wed, there will I
  Pedro. And, as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join with
    thee to disgrace her.
  John. I will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses.
    Bear it coldly but till midnight, and let the issue show itself.
    So will you say when you have seen the Sequel.
Enter Dogberry and his compartner [Verges], with the Watch.
  Verg. Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation,
  Dog. Nay, that were a punishment too good for them if they should
    have any allegiance in them, being chosen for the Prince's watch.
  Verg. Well, give them their charge, neighbour Dogberry.
  Dog. First, who think you the most desartless man to be constable?
  1. Watch. Hugh Oatcake, sir, or George Seacoal; for they can write
  Dog. Come hither, neighbour Seacoal. God hath bless'd you with a
    good name. To be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune, but
    for your writing and reading, let that appear when there is no
    need of such vanity. You are thought here to be the most
    senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch. Therefore
    bear you the lanthorn. This is your charge: you shall comprehend
    all vagrom men; you are to bid any man stand, in the Prince's
  Dog. Why then, take no note of him, but let him go, and presently
    call the rest of the watch together and thank God you are rid of
  Verg. If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none of the
  Dog. True, and they are to meddle with none but the Prince's
    subjects. You shall also make no noise in the streets; for for
    the watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable, and not to be
  2. Watch. We will rather sleep than talk. We know what belongs to
    bills be not stol'n. Well, you are to call at all the alehouses
    and bid those that are drunk get them to bed.
  2. Watch. How if they will not?
  Dog. Why then, let them alone till they are sober. If they make you
    not then the better answer, You may say they are not the men you
    took them for.
    office, to be no true man; and for such kind of men, the less you
    meddle or make with them, why, the more your honesty.
  Dog. Truly, by your office you may; but I think they that touch
  Verg. If you hear a child cry in the night, you must call to the
  2. Watch. How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?
  Dog. Why then, depart in peace and let the child wake her with
    crying; for the ewe that will not hear her lamb when it baes will
  Dog. This is the end of the charge: you, constable, are to present
    the Prince's own person. If you meet the Prince in the night,
  Dog. Five shillings to one on't with any man that knows the
    statutes, he may stay him! Marry, not without the Prince be
    willing; for indeed the watch ought to offend no man, and it is
  Dog. Ha, ah, ha! Well, masters, good night. An there be any matter
    upon the church bench till two, and then all to bed.
    Signior Leonato's door; for the wedding being there tomorrow,
    there is a great coil to-night. Adieu. Be vigitant, I beseech
  Bora. Mass, and my elbow itch'd! I thought there would a scab
  Con. I will owe thee an answer for that; and now forward with thy
  Bora. Stand thee close then under this penthouse, for it drizzles
    rain, and I will, like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.
  Bora. Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villany
    poor ones may make what price they will.
  Bora. That shows thou art unconfirm'd. Thou knowest that the
  Bora. I mean the fashion.
  Con. Yes, the fashion is the fashion.
  Bora. Tush! I may as well say the fool's the fool. But seest thou
  Con. No; 'twas the vane on the house.
    how giddily 'a turns about all the hot-bloods between fourteen
    and five-and-thirty? sometimes fashioning them like Pharaoh's
    soldiers in the reechy painting, sometime like god Bel's priests
    in the old church window, sometime like the shaven Hercules in
    the smirch'd worm-eaten tapestry, where his codpiece seems as
  Con. All this I see; and I see that the fashion wears out more
    apparel than the man. But art not thou thyself giddy with the
    me of the fashion?
  Bora. Not so neither. But know that I have to-night wooed Margaret,
    the Lady Hero's gentlewoman, by the name of Hero. She leans me
    good night--I tell this tale vilely; I should first tell thee how
    the Prince, Claudio and my master, planted and placed and
    possessed by my master Don John, saw afar off in the orchard this
  Con. And thought they Margaret was Hero?
  Bora. Two of them did, the Prince and Claudio; but the devil my
    first possess'd them, partly by the dark night, which did deceive
    them, but chiefly by my villany, which did confirm any slander
    meet her, as he was appointed, next morning at the temple, and
    there, before the whole congregation, shame her with what he saw
  2. Watch. We charge you in the Prince's name stand!
  1. Watch. Call up the right Master Constable. We have here
    recover'd the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known
    in the commonwealth.
  2. Watch. And one Deformed is one of them. I know him; 'a wears a
    these men's bills.
  Hero. And bid her come hither.
  Marg. Troth, I think your other rebato were better.
  Hero. No, pray thee, good Meg, I'll wear this.
  Hero. My cousin's a fool, and thou art another. I'll wear none but
  Marg. I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a
    I saw the Duchess of Milan's gown that they praise so.
  Hero. O, that exceeds, they say.
  Marg. 'Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.
  Hero. Fie upon thee! art not ashamed?
    offend nobody. Is there any harm in 'the heavier for a husband'?
    None, I think, an it be the right husband and the right wife.
    Otherwise 'tis light, and not heavy. Ask my Lady Beatrice else.
  Hero. Why, how now? Do you speak in the sick tune?
  Beat. I am out of all other tune, methinks.
  Beat. Yea, 'Light o' love' with your heels! then, if your husband
  Beat. For the letter that begins them all, H.
  Marg. Well, an you be not turn'd Turk, there's no more sailing by
    the star.
  Beat. What means the fool, trow?
  Marg. Nothing I; but God send every one their heart's desire!
  Hero. These gloves the Count sent me, they are an excellent
    to your heart. It is the only thing for a qualm.
    Yet Benedick was such another, and now is he become a man. He
    know not, but methinks you look with your eyes as other women do.
  Urs. Madam, withdraw. The Prince, the Count, Signior Benedick, Don
    John, and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to
Enter Leonato and the Constable [Dogberry] and the Headborough [verges].
  Dog. Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off the matter--an old
    desire they were; but, in faith, honest as the skin between his
  Dog. It pleases your worship to say so, but we are the poor Duke's
    good exclamation on your worship as of any man in the city; and
  Dog. A good old man, sir; he will be talking. As they say, 'When
    the age is in, the wit is out.' God help us! it is a world to
    aspicious persons, and we would have them this morning examined
  Leon. Take their examination yourself and bring it me. I am now in
  Mess. My lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to her
  Leon. I'll wait upon them. I am ready.
    his pen and inkhorn to the jail. We are now to examination these
    drive some of them to a non-come. Only get the learned writer to
    set down our excommunication, and meet me at the jail.
Enter Don Pedro, [John the] Bastard, Leonato, Friar [Francis], Claudio,
  Leon. Come, Friar Francis, be brief. Only to the plain form of
    marriage, and you shall recount their particular duties
  Friar. You come hither, my lord, to marry this lady?
  Friar. Lady, you come hither to be married to this count?
  Friar. If either of you know any inward impediment why you should
    knowing what they do!
  Bene. How now? interjections? Why then, some be of laughing, as,
  Claud. Stand thee by, friar. Father, by your leave:
    She's but the sign and semblance of her honour.
    By these exterior shows? But she is none:
    She knows the heat of a luxurious bed;
    Have vanquish'd the resistance of her youth
    And so extenuate the forehand sin.
    But, as a brother to his sister, show'd
  Hero. And seem'd I ever otherwise to you?
  Claud. Out on the seeming! I will write against it.
    As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown;
  Leon. Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?
  John. Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.
    Is this the Prince, Is this the Prince's brother?
    And by that fatherly and kindly power
  Leon. I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.
  Pedro. Why, then are you no maiden. Leonato,
    Myself, my brother, and this grieved Count
    Confess'd the vile encounters they have had
  John. Fie, fie! they are not to be nam'd, my lord--
    Without offence to utter them. Thus, pretty lady,
    But fare thee well, most foul, most fair! Farewell,
    For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love,
    Smother her spirits up.
  Bene. How doth the lady?
    Death is the fairest cover for her shame
    Myself would on the rearward of reproaches
    O, one too much by thee! Why had I one?
    Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea
    Would the two princes lie? and Claudio lie,
    By noting of the lady. I have mark'd
    And in her eye there hath appear'd a fire
    To burn the errors that these princes hold
    Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left
    Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse
    Let all my sins lack mercy! O my father,
    Maintain'd the change of words with any creature,
  Friar. There is some strange misprision in the princes.
  Bene. Two of them have the very bent of honour;
    And if their wisdoms be misled in this,
    The practice of it lives in John the bastard,
  Leon. I know not. If they speak but truth of her,
    These hands shall tear her. If they wrong her honour,
    The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
    But they shall find awak'd in such a kind
    To quit me of them throughly.
    Your daughter here the princes left for dead,
    Upon the instant that she was accus'd,
    That what we have we prize not to the worth
    Why, then we rack the value, then we find
    Into the eye and prospect of his soul
    Will fashion the event in better shape
    The supposition of the lady's death
    Will quench the wonder of her infamy.
  Bene. Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you;
    Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio,
    For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure.
  Beat. Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right
  Bene. Is there any way to show such friendship?
  Bene. I do love nothing in the world so well as you. Is not that
  Beat. As strange as the thing I know not. It were as possible for
    thee.
  Beat. Why then, God forgive me!
  Bene. Come, bid me do anything for thee.
  Bene. Ha! not for the wide world!
  Beat. Is 'a not approved in the height a villain, that hath
    man! What? bear her in hand until they come to take hands, and
    then with public accusation, uncover'd slander, unmitigated
    rancour--O God, that I were a man! I would eat his heart in the
    cannot be a man with wishing; therefore I will die a woman with
  Bene. Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love thee.
  Beat. Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.
  Bene. Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wrong'd Hero?
Enter the Constables [Dogberry and Verges] and the Sexton, in gowns,
[and the Watch, with Conrade and] Borachio.
  Verg. O, a stool and a cushion for the sexton.
  Sex. Which be the malefactors?
  Verg. Nay, that's certain. We have the exhibition to examine.
  Sex. But which are the offenders that are to be examined? let them
  Dog. Yea, marry, let them come before me. What is your name,
  Dog. Write down that they hope they serve God; and write God first,
    with him. Come you hither, sirrah. A word in your ear. Sir, I say
  Dog. Well, stand aside. Fore God, they are both in a tale.
    Have you writ down that they are none?
  Sex. Master Constable, you go not the way to examine. You must call
    forth the watch that are their accusers.
  Dog. Yea, marry, that's the eftest way. Let the watch come forth.
    Masters, I charge you in the Prince's name accuse these men.
  1. Watch. This man said, sir, that Don John the Prince's brother
    to call a prince's brother villain.
  Dog. Pray thee, fellow, peace. I do not like thy look, I promise
    thee.
    for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully.
    disgrace Hero before the whole assembly, and not marry her.
    accus'd, in this manner refus'd, and upon the grief of this
    suddenly died. Master Constable, let these men be bound and
    brought to Leonato's. I will go before and show him their
  Dog. Come, let them be opinion'd.
  Verg. Let them be in the hands--
  Dog. God's my life, where's the sexton? Let him write down the
    Prince's officer coxcomb. Come, bind them.--Thou naughty varlet!
    piety, as shall be prov'd upon thee by good witness. I am a wise
    is in Messina, and one that knows the law, go to! and a rich
Enter Leonato and his brother [ Antonio].
  Leon. I pray thee cease thy counsel,
    Bring me a father that so lov'd his child,
    Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
    And I of him will gather patience.
    But there is no such man; for, brother, men
    Which they themselves not feel; but, tasting it,
    To those that wring under the load of sorrow,
  Leon. I pray thee peace. I will be flesh and blood;
    For there was never yet philosopher
    That could endure the toothache patiently,
    However they have writ the style of gods
  Ant. Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself.
    And that shall Claudio know; so shall the Prince,
    And all of them that thus dishonour her.
  Ant. Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.
    I fear thee not.
    Do challenge thee to trial of a man.
  Leon. Brother--
    As I dare take a serpent by the tongue.
  Leon. Brother Anthony--
  Ant. Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea,
    And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,
    How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst;
  Leon. But, brother Anthony--
  Leon. No? Come, brother, away!--I will be heard.
  Pedro. See, see! Here comes the man we went to seek.
  Pedro. Leonato and his brother. What think'st thou? Had we fought,
    I doubt we should have been too young for them.
  Bene. In a false quarrel there is no true valour. I came to seek
  Claud. We have been up and down to seek thee; for we are high-proof
  Claud. Never any did so, though very many have been beside their
    wit. I will bid thee draw, as we do the minstrel--draw to
    mettle enough in thee to kill care.
  Bene. Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career an you charge it
    against me. I pray you choose another subject.
  Claud. Nay then, give him another staff; this last was broke cross.
    a capon, the which if I do not carve most curiously, say my
  Pedro. I'll tell thee how Beatrice prais'd thy wit the other day. I
    hurts nobody.' 'Nay,' said I, 'the gentleman is wise.' 'Certain,'
    said she, a wise gentleman.' 'Nay,' said I, 'he hath the
    double tongue; there's two tongues.' Thus did she an hour
    together transshape thy particular virtues. Yet at last she
    concluded with a sigh, thou wast the proper'st man in Italy.
  Claud. For the which she wept heartily and said she cared not.
  Claud. All, all! and moreover, God saw him when he was hid in the
  Pedro. But when shall we set the savage bull's horns on the
  Claud. Yea, and text underneath, 'Here dwells Benedick, the married
    your gossiplike humour. You break jests as braggards do their
    brother the bastard is fled from Messina. You have among you
    kill'd a sweet and innocent lady. For my Lord Lackbeard there, he
    and I shall meet; and till then peace be with him.
  Claud. In most profound earnest; and, I'll warrant you, for the
  Pedro. And hath challeng'd thee.
  Enter Constables [Dogberry and Verges, with the Watch, leading]
  Claud. He is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a doctor to
    Did he not say my brother was fled?
  Pedro. How now? two of my brother's men bound? Borachio one.
  Claud. Hearken after their offence, my lord.
  Pedro. Officers, what offence have these men done?
  Dog. Marry, sir, they have committed false report; moreover, they
    have spoken untruths; secondarily, they are slanders; sixth and
    lastly, they have belied a lady; thirdly, they have verified
    unjust things; and to conclude, they are lying knaves.
  Pedro. First, I ask thee what they have done; thirdly, I ask thee
    what's their offence; sixth and lastly, why they are committed;
    and to conclude, what you lay to their charge.
    there's one meaning well suited.
  Bora. Sweet Prince, let me go no farther to mine answer. Do you
    very eyes. What your wisdoms could not discover, these shallow
    fools have brought to light, who in the night overheard me
    confessing to this man, how Don John your brother incensed me to
    slander the Lady Hero; how you were brought into the orchard and
    when you should marry her. My villany they have upon record,
    which I had rather seal with my death than repeat over to my
    accusation; and briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a
  Pedro. But did my brother set thee on to this?
  Bora. Yea, and paid me richly for the practice of it.
    In the rare semblance that I lov'd it first.
  Dog. Come, bring away the plaintiffs. By this time our sexton hath
    reformed Signior Leonato of the matter. And, masters, do not
  Verg. Here, here comes Master Signior Leonato, and the sexton too.
          Enter Leonato, his brother [Antonio], and the Sexton.
  Leon. Which is the villain? Let me see his eyes,
    That, when I note another man like him,
    I may avoid him. Which of these is he?
  Leon. Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast kill'd
    Possess the people in Messina here
    Be yet my nephew. My brother hath a daughter,
    Almost the copy of my child that's dead,
    Give her the right you should have giv'n her cousin,
  Leon. To-morrow then I will expect your coming;
    Hir'd to it by your brother.
    plaintiff here, the offender, did call me ass. I beseech you let
    it be rememb'red in his punishment. And also the watch heard them
    lock hanging by it, and borrows money in God's name, the which he
  Leon. I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.
  Dog. God save the foundation!
  Leon. Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.
    your worship to correct yourself, for the example of others.
  Leon. [to the Watch] Bring you these fellows on.--We'll talk with
  Bene. Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands
    by helping me to the speech of Beatrice.
  Marg. Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?
  Bene. Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's mouth--it catches.
  Marg. And yours as blunt as the fencer's foils, which hit but hurt
    And so I pray thee call Beatrice. I give thee the bucklers.
  Marg. Give us the swords; we have bucklers of our own.
  Bene. If you use them, Margaret, you must put in the pikes with a
    vice, and they are dangerous weapons for maids.
  Bene. And therefore will come.
    I mean in singing; but in loving Leander the good swimmer,
    Troilus the first employer of panders, and a whole book full of
    these quondam carpet-mongers, whose names yet run smoothly in the
    even road of a blank verse--why, they were never so truly turn'd
    Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I call'd thee?
  Bene. O, stay but till then!
  Bene. Only foul words; and thereupon I will kiss thee.
  Bene. Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense, so
    forcible is thy wit. But I must tell thee plainly, Claudio
    undergoes my challenge; and either I must shortly hear from him
    or I will subscribe him a coward. And I pray thee now tell me,
  Beat. For them all together, which maintain'd so politic a state of
    evil that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with
    them. But for which of my good parts did you first suffer love
  Bene. Suffer love!--a good epithet. I do suffer love indeed, for I
    love thee against my will.
  Bene. An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that liv'd in the time of
    ere he dies, he shall live no longer in monument than the bell
    rings and the widow weeps.
    Therefore is it most expedient for the wise, if Don Worm (his
    conscience) find no impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet
    It is proved my Lady Hero hath been falsely accus'd, the Prince
    and Claudio mightily abus'd, and Don John is the author of all,
    eyes; and moreover, I will go with thee to thy uncle's.
  Claud. Is this the monument of Leonato?
          Was the Hero that here lies.
        So the life that died with shame
    Hang thou there upon the tomb,
                                          [Hangs up the scroll.]
        Pardon, goddess of the night,
        For the which, with songs of woe,
        Round about her tomb they go.
    The wolves have prey'd, and look, the gentle day,
    Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about
    Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey.
  Pedro. Come, let us hence and put on other weeds,
    And then to Leonato's we will go.
  Leon. So are the Prince and Claudio, who accus'd her
    Upon the error that you heard debated.
    In the true course of all the question.
    And when I send for you, come hither mask'd.
    To visit me. You know your office, brother:
    You must be father to your brother's daughter,
  Bene. To bind me, or undo me--one of them.
    From Claudio, and the Prince; but what's your will?
    In the state of honourable marriage;
       Enter Don Pedro and Claudio and two or three other.
    Here comes the Prince and Claudio.
    To-day to marry with my brother's daughter?
  Leon. Call her forth, brother. Here's the friar ready.
  Pedro. Good morrow, Benedick. Why, what's the matter
  Claud. I think he thinks upon the savage bull.
    And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
    When he would play the noble beast in love.
    And some such strange bull leap'd your father's cow
       Enter [Leonato's] brother [Antonio], Hero, Beatrice,
            Margaret, Ursula, [the ladies wearing masks].
  Claud. For this I owe you. Here comes other reckonings.
    Which is the lady I must seize upon?
  Claud. Why then, she's mine. Sweet, let me see your face.
  Hero. And when I liv'd I was your other wife;       [Unmasks.]
    And when you lov'd you were my other husband.
  Claud. Another Hero!
    When, after that the holy rites are ended,
    And to the chapel let us presently.
  Bene. Why, then your uncle, and the Prince, and Claudio
    Have been deceived; for they swore you did.
  Beat. Why, then my cousin, Margaret, and Ursula
    Are much deceiv'd; for they did swear you did.
  Leon. Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.
  Hero. And here's another,
    Come, I will have thee; but, by this light, I take thee for pity.
  Beat. I'll tell thee what, Prince: a college of wit-crackers cannot
    marry, I will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say
    against it; and therefore never flout at me for what I have said
    For thy part, Claudio, I did think to have beaten thee; but in
    might have cudgell'd thee out of thy single life, to make thee a
    not look exceeding narrowly to thee.
    sad. Get thee a wife, get thee a wife! There is no staff more
  Mess. My lord, your brother John is ta'en in flight,
  Bene. Think not on him till to-morrow. I'll devise thee brave
  OTHELLO, the Moor, general of the Venetian forces
  IAGO, ensign to Othello
  CASSIO, lieutenant to Othello
  BRABANTIO, Venetian Senator, father of Desdemona
  GRATIANO, nobleman of Venice, brother of Brabantio
  A Clown in service to Othello
    As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.
  IAGO. Despise me, if I do not. Three great ones of the city,
    Off-capp'd to him; and, by the faith of man,
    Evades them, with a bumbast circumstance
    Horribly stuff'd with epithets of war,
    That never set a squadron in the field,
    Nor the division of a battle knows
    More than a spinster; unless the bookish theoric,
    Wherein the toged consuls can propose
    Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had the election;
    And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
    At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds
    Christian and heathen, must be belee'd and calm'd
    And I- God bless the mark!- his Moorship's ancient.
  RODERIGO. By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.
  IAGO. Why, there's no remedy. 'Tis the curse of service,
    Stood heir to the first. Now, sir, be judge yourself
    Whether I in any just term am affined
    To love the Moor.
  RODERIGO.           I would not follow him then.
    Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are
    Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
    And throwing but shows of service on their lords
    Do well thrive by them; and when they have lined their coats
    Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul,
    Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago.
  RODERIGO. What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe,
  IAGO.                     Call up her father,
    Proclaim him in the streets, incense her kinsmen,
  RODERIGO. Here is her father's house; I'll call aloud.
    As when, by night and negligence, the fire
  BRABANTIO. What is the reason of this terrible summons?
    What is the matter there?
    Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,
    Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you.
    I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors.
    My daughter is not for thee; and now, in madness,
    My spirit and my place have in them power
    To make this bitter to thee.
    if the devil bid you. Because we come to do you service and you
  IAGO. I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the
    Moor are now making the beast with two backs.
  BRABANTIO. This thou shalt answer; I know thee, Roderigo.
    At this odd-even and dull watch o' the night,
    To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor-
    We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs;
    That, from the sense of all civility,
    Let loose on me the justice of the state
  BRABANTIO.               Strike on the tinder, ho!
    Against the Moor; for I do know, the state,
    With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars,
    Which even now stands in act, that, for their souls,
    Another of his fathom they have none
    To lead their business; in which regard,
    Lead to the Sagittary the raised search,
    And there will I be with him. So farewell.                  Exit.
    With the Moor, say'st thou? Who would be a father!
    Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you?
  RODERIGO. Truly, I think they are.
  BRABANTIO. O heaven! How got she out? O treason of the blood!
    Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds
    By what you see them act. Is there not charms
    By which the property of youth and maidhood
  BRABANTIO. Call up my brother. O, would you had had her!
    Some one way, some another. Do you know
    Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?
Another street.
Enter Othello, Iago, and Attendants with torches.
  IAGO. Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
    Yet do I hold it very stuff o' the conscience
    To do no contrived murther. I lack iniquity
    I had thought to have yerk'd him here under the ribs.
    That, with the little godliness I have,
    That the magnifico is much beloved,
    As double as the Duke's. He will divorce you,
    My services, which I have done the signiory,
    But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
    For the sea's worth. But, look! What lights come yond?
  IAGO. Those are the raised father and his friends.
    Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
  OTHELLO. The servants of the Duke? And my lieutenant?
    The goodness of the night upon you, friends!
    What is the news?
    Even on the instant.
  OTHELLO.               What is the matter, think you?
    This very night at one another's heels;
    And many of the consuls, raised and met,
    Are at the Duke's already. You have been hotly call'd for,
    I will but spend a word here in the house
                          Re-enter Othello.
  CASSIO. Here comes another troop to seek for you.
  OTHELLO.                  Holla! Stand there!
  RODERIGO. Signior, it is the Moor.
  OTHELLO. Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.
    Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,
    Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
    Judge me the world, if 'tis not gross in sense
    I therefore apprehend and do attach thee
    For an abuser of the world, a practicer
    Both you of my inclining and the rest.
    Call thee to answer.
    How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,
    Upon some present business of the state
    In this time of the night? Bring him away;
    Or any of my brothers of the state,
    Cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own;
  DUKE. There is no composition in these news
    That gives them credit.
  FIRST SENATOR.            Indeed they are disproportion'd;
    But though they jump not on a just account-
    As in these cases, where the aim reports,
    'Tis oft with difference- yet do they all confirm
    I do not so secure me in the error,
    But the main article I do approve
  FIRST OFFICER. A messenger from the galleys.
  DUKE.                                Now, what's the business?
    So was I bid report here to the state
    The importancy of Cyprus to the Turk,
    That as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
    But altogether lacks the abilities
    We must not think the Turk is so unskillful
    Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,
    Have there injointed them with an after fleet.
  MESSENGER. Of thirty sail; and now they do re-stem
  DUKE. 'Tis certain then for Cyprus.
  FIRST SENATOR. Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.
       Enter Brabantio, Othello, Iago, Roderigo, and Officers.
  DUKE. Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
    Against the general enemy Ottoman.
    Neither my place nor aught I heard of business
    Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general care
    That it engluts and swallows other sorrows,
  DUKE.                     Why, what's the matter?
    And you of her, the bloody book of law
    You shall yourself read in the bitter letter
    Here is the man, this Moor, whom now, it seems,
    Your special mandate for the state affairs
    Hath hither brought.
  DUKE. [To Othello.] What in your own part can you say to this?
    And little blest with the soft phrase of peace;
    For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith,
    Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used
    Their dearest action in the tented field,
    And therefore little shall I grace my cause
    Why this should be. I therefore vouch again
    That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood,
    Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
  FIRST SENATOR. But, Othello, speak.
    Send for the lady to the Sagittary,
    And let her speak of me before her father.
    The trust, the office I do hold of you,
  DUKE.                     Fetch Desdemona hither.
  OTHELLO. Ancient, conduct them; you best know the place.
    I do confess the vices of my blood,
  DUKE. Say it, Othello.
  OTHELLO. Her father loved me, oft invited me,
    Still question'd me the story of my life
    From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes,
    To the very moment that he bade me tell it:
    Of hair-breadth 'scapes i' the imminent deadly breach,
    Of being taken by the insolent foe
    And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence
    It was my hint to speak- such was the process-
    And of the Cannibals that each other eat,
    Do grow beneath their shoulders. This to hear
    But still the house affairs would draw her thence,
    She loved me for the dangers I had pass'd,
    And I loved her that she did pity them.
    This only is the witchcraft I have used.
    Here comes the lady; let her witness it.
    Take up this mangled matter at the best:
    Men do their broken weapons rather use
    Than their bare hands.
    If she confess that she was half the wooer,
    Light on the man! Come hither, gentle mistress.
  DESDEMONA.                      My noble father,
    How to respect you; you are the lord of duty,
    I am hitherto your daughter. But here's my husband,
    And so much duty as my mother show'd
    To you, preferring you before her father,
    Due to the Moor, my lord.
    Please it your Grace, on to the state affairs;
    I had rather to adopt a child than get it.
    Come hither, Moor.
    I here do give thee that with all my heart
    I would keep from thee. For your sake, jewel,
    I am glad at soul I have no other child;
    To hang clogs on them. I have done, my lord.
    Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers
    When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
    By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
    Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
    The robb'd that smiles steals something from the thief;
  BRABANTIO. So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile;
    He bears the sentence well, that nothing bears
    But the free comfort which from thence he hears;
    But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow
    That the bruised heart was pierced through the ear.
    I humbly beseech you, proceed to the affairs of state.
    Othello, the fortitude of the place is best known to you; and
    though we have there a substitute of most allowed sufficiency,
    voice on you. You must therefore be content to slubber the gloss
    Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war
    These present wars against the Ottomites.
    Most humbly therefore bending to your state,
    Be't at her father's.
  DESDEMONA.      Nor I. I would not there reside
    To put my father in impatient thoughts
  DESDEMONA. That I did love the Moor to live with him,
    May trumpet to the world. My heart's subdued
    Even to the very quality of my lord.
    I saw Othello's visage in his mind,
    A moth of peace, and he go to the war,
    Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not
    To please the palate of my appetite,
    Nor to comply with heat- the young affects
    Of feather'd Cupid seel with wanton dullness
    Either for her stay or going. The affair cries haste,
  DUKE. At nine i' the morning here we'll meet again.
    Othello, leave some officer behind,
    She has deceived her father, and may thee.
    My Desdemona must I leave to thee.
    I prithee, let thy wife attend on her,
    And bring them after in the best advantage.
    To spend with thee. We must obey the time.
                                        Exeunt Othello and Desdemona.
  IAGO. If thou dost, I shall never love thee after.
  RODERIGO. It is silliness to live when to live is torment, and then
  IAGO. O villainous! I have looked upon the world for four times
    would say I would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen, I
    Our bodies are gardens, to the which our wills are gardeners; so
    many, either to have it sterile with idleness or manured with
    industry, why, the power and corrigible authority of this lies in
    our wills. If the balance of our lives had not one scale of
    reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of
  IAGO. It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the
    better stead thee than now. Put money in thy purse; follow thou
    the wars; defeat thy favor with an usurped beard. I say, put
    continue her love to the Moor- put money in thy purse- nor he his
    are changeable in their wills- fill thy purse with money. The
    shortly as acerb as the coloquintida. She must change for youth;
    when she is sated with his body, she will find the error of her
    choice. She must have change, she must; therefore put money in
    way than drowning. Make all the money thou canst. If sanctimony
    Venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the tribe of hell,
    thou shalt enjoy her- therefore make money. A pox of drowning
    thyself! It is clean out of the way. Seek thou rather to be
  RODERIGO. Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the issue?
  IAGO. Thou art sure of me- go, make money. I have told thee often,
    and I retell thee again and again, I hate the Moor. My cause is
    a pleasure, me a sport. There are many events in the womb of time
  RODERIGO. Where shall we meet i' the morning?
  RODERIGO. I'll be with thee betimes.
    But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor,
    After some time, to abuse Othello's ear
    And will as tenderly be led by the nose
    Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.
A seaport in Cyprus. An open place near the quay.
  MONTANO. What from the cape can you discern at sea?
    I cannot, 'twixt the heaven and the main,
  MONTANO. Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land;
    If it hath ruffian'd so upon the sea,
    What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
    Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. A segregation of the Turkish fleet.
    For do but stand upon the foaming shore,
    The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds;
    Seems to cast water on the burning bear,
    And quench the guards of the ever-fixed pole.
    On the enchafed flood.
  MONTANO.                 If that the Turkish fleet
    Be not enshelter'd and embay'd, they are drown'd;
    The desperate tempest hath so bang'd the Turks,
    That their designment halts. A noble ship of Venice
    On most part of their fleet.
    Lieutenant to the warlike Moor, Othello,
    Is come on shore; the Moor himself at sea,
    Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly
    And prays the Moor be safe; for they were parted
    For I have served him, and the man commands
    Like a full soldier. Let's to the seaside, ho!
    As well to see the vessel that's come in
    As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
    Even till we make the main and the aerial blue
  CASSIO. Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle,
    That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens
    Give him defense against the elements,
  FOURTH GENTLEMAN. The town is empty; on the brow o' the sea
    Stand ranks of people, and they cry, "A sail!"
  CASSIO. My hopes do shape him for the governor.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. They do discharge their shot of courtesy-
    One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,
    And in the essential vesture of creation
    Does tire the ingener.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. 'Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.
    Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
    Traitors ensteep'd to clog the guiltless keel,
    Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
    A se'nnight's speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,
    The riches of the ship is come on shore!
    Hall to thee, lady! And the grace of heaven,
    Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
    Enwheel thee round!
  CASSIO. The great contention of the sea and skies
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. They give their greeting to the citadel;
  CASSIO.                      See for the news.
  DESDEMONA. O, fie upon thee, slanderer!
  DESDEMONA. Come on, assay- There's one gone to the harbor?
    The thing I am by seeming otherwise.
    The one's for use, the other useth it.
  IAGO. If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
  DESDEMONA. These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i' the
  IAGO. There's none so foul and foolish thereunto,
  DESDEMONA. O heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the worst best. But what
    in the authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very
    To change the cod's head for the salmon's tail;
  CASSIO. He speaks home, madam. You may relish him more in the
    soldier than in the scholar.
  IAGO. [Aside.] He takes her by the palm; ay, well said, whisper.
    Cassio. Ay, smile upon her, do; I will gyve thee in thine own
    courtship. You say true; 'tis so, indeed. If such tricks as these
    most apt to play the sir in. Very good. Well kissed! an excellent
    Would they were clyster-pipes for your sake! [Trumpet within.]
                    Enter Othello and Attendants.
  DESDEMONA.                  My dear Othello!
    May the winds blow till they have waken'd death!
    And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas
    That not another comfort like to this
    And this, and this, the greatest discords be          Kisses her.
    But I'll set down the pegs that make this music,
  OTHELLO.             Come, let us to the castle.
    News, friends: our wars are done, the Turks are drown'd.
    I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,
    In mine own comforts. I prithee, good Iago,
    Go to the bay and disembark my coffers.
    Bring thou the master to the citadel;
  IAGO. Do thou meet me presently at the harbor. Come hither. If thou
    be'st valiant- as they say base men being in love have then a
    nobility in their natures more than is native to them- list me.
    The lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard. First, I
    must tell thee this: Desdemona is directly in love with him.
    with what violence she first loved the Moor, but for bragging and
    fed; and what delight shall she have to look on the devil? When
    the blood is made dull with the act of sport, there should be,
    all which the Moor is defective in. Now, for want of these
    abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the Moor;
    unforced position- who stands so eminently in the degree of this
    fortune as Cassio does? A knave very voluble; no further
    conscionable than in putting on the mere form of civil and humane
    seeming, for the better compass of his salt and most hidden loose
    itself- a devilish knave! Besides, the knave is handsome, young,
    look after- a pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found
    she had been blest, she would never have loved the Moor. Blest
    pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand?
  IAGO. Lechery, by this hand; an index and obscure prologue to the
    history of lust and foul thoughts. They met so near with their
    lips that their breaths embraced together. Villainous thoughts,
    Roderigo! When these mutualities so marshal the way, hard at hand
    comes the master and main exercise, the incorporate conclusion.
    Venice. Watch you tonight; for the command, I'll lay't upon you.
    occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or
    tainting his discipline, or from what other course you please,
    which the time shall more favorably minister.
    will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny, whose qualification shall
    come into no true taste again but by the displanting of Cassio.
    So shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by the means
    I shall then have to prefer them, and the impediment most
    profitably removed, without the which there were no expectation
  IAGO. I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel. I must
    For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
    Hath leap'd into my seat; the thought whereof
    Or failing so, yet that I put the Moor
    For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
    I'll have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
    Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb
    Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me
  HERALD. It is Othello's pleasure, our noble and valiant general,
    that upon certain tidings now arrived, importing the mere
    perdition of the Turkish fleet, every man put himself into
    sport and revels his addiction leads him; for besides these
    beneficial news, it is the celebration of his nuptial. So much
    there is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of five
    till the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the isle of Cyprus
    and our noble general Othello!                            Exeunt.
A hall in the castle.
Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio, and Attendants.
  OTHELLO. Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight.
    The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
                           Exeunt Othello, Desdemona, and Attendants.
  CASSIO. Welcome, Iago; we must to the watch.
  IAGO. Not this hour, lieutenant; 'tis not yet ten o' the clock. Our
    general cast us thus early for the love of his Desdemona; who let
    us not therefore blame. He hath not yet made wanton the night
  IAGO. Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a
    that would fain have a measure to the health of black Othello.
    for drinking. I could well wish courtesy would invent some other
  IAGO. O, they are our friends! But one cup; I'll drink for you.
    unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with
  IAGO. What, man! 'Tis a night of revels, the gallants desire it.
  CASSIO. Where are they?
  IAGO. Here at the door; I pray you, call them in.
    Whom love hath turn'd almost the wrong side out,
    That hold their honors in a wary distance,
    And they watch too. Now, 'mongst this flock of drunkards,
    That may offend the isle. But here they come.
  CASSIO. 'Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.
    [Sings.]   "And let me the canakin clink, clink;
               And let me the canakin clink.
               Why then let a soldier drink."
  IAGO. I learned it in England, where indeed they are most potent in
    vomit ere the next pottle can be filled.
  CASSIO. To the health of our general!
               He held them sixpence all too dear,
                 With that he call'd the tailor lown.
               'Tis pride that pulls the country down;
                 Then take thine auld cloak about thee."
  CASSIO. Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.
    those things. Well, God's above all, and there be souls must be
    saved, and there be souls must not be saved.
  CASSIO. For mine own part- no offense to the general, nor any man
  CASSIO. Ay, but, by your leave, not before me; the lieutenant is to
    be saved before the ancient. Let's have no more of this; let's to
  CASSIO. Why, very well then; you must not think then that I am
  MONTANO. To the platform, masters; come, let's set the watch.
    The one as long as the other. 'Tis pity of him.
    I fear the trust Othello puts him in
  IAGO. 'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep.
    He'll watch the horologe a double set,
    Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio
    I pray you, after the lieutenant; go.              Exit Roderigo.
  MONTANO. And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor
    So to the Moor.
  MONTANO. What's the matter, lieutenant?
  CASSIO. A knave teach me my duty! But I'll beat the knave into a
  CASSIO. Let me go, sir, or I'll knock you o'er the mazzard.
    Who's that that rings the bell?- Diablo, ho!
                   Re-enter Othello and Attendants.
  OTHELLO.                      What is the matter here?
  MONTANO. 'Zounds, I bleed still; I am hurt to the death.
    Hold! the general speaks to you! Hold, hold, for shame!
    Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
    Silence that dreadful bell; it frights the isle
    From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?
    Speak: who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.
    Devesting them for bed; and then, but now
    Swords out, and tilting one at other's breast,
    In mouths of wisest censure. What's the matter,
    And spend your rich opinion for the name
  MONTANO. Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger.
    Assays to lead the way. If I once stir,
    Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
    Yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear,
    In night, and on the court and guard of safety!
    I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth
    Yet, I persuade myself, to speak the truth
    Myself the crying fellow did pursue,
    Outran my purpose; and I return'd the rather
    For that I heard the clink and fall of swords,
    For this was brief- I found them close together,
    At blow and thrust, even as again they were
    When you yourself did part them.
    But men are men; the best sometimes forget.
    As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
    Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee,
    I'll make thee an example.
  DESDEMONA.                   What's the matter?
    Iago, look with care about the town,
    Come, Desdemona, 'tis the soldiers' life.
    To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
    reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what
    wound; there is more sense in that than in reputation. Reputation
    unless you repute yourself such a loser. What, man! there are
    ways to recover the general again. You are but now cast in his
  CASSIO. I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a
    thee devil!
    enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains! that we should,
  CASSIO. It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the
    devil wrath: one unperfectness shows me another, to make me
  IAGO. Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time, the place,
    and the condition of this country stands, I could heartily wish
    stop them all. To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and
    and the ingredient is a devil.
    tell you what you shall do. Our general's wife is now the
    and given up himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement
  IAGO. I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.
  CASSIO. I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I will beseech
    the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me. I am desperate of my
    fortunes if they check me here.
  IAGO. You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant, I must to the
  IAGO. And what's he then that says I play the villain?
    Probal to thinking, and indeed the course
    To win the Moor again? For 'tis most easy
    As the free elements. And then for her
    To win the Moor, were't to renounce his baptism,
    Even as her appetite shall play the god
    With his weak function. How am I then a villain
    When devils will the blackest sins put on,
    And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
    She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
    And out of her own goodness make the net
    That shall enmesh them all.
  RODERIGO. I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that
    hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My money is almost spent; I
    have been tonight exceedingly well cudgeled; and I think the
  IAGO. How poor are they that have not patience!
    Does't not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
    Though other things grow fair against the sun,
    Content thyself awhile. By the mass, 'tis morning;
    Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.
    Retire thee; go where thou art billeted.
    Nay, get thee gone. [Exit Roderigo.] Two things are to be done:
    Myself the while to draw the Moor apart,
    Soliciting his wife. Ay, that's the way;
Before the castle.
    they speak i' the nose thus?
  CLOWN. Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?
  FIRST MUSICIAN. Ay, marry, are they, sir.
  CLOWN. O, thereby hangs a tail.
    masters, here's money for you; and the general so likes your
    but, as they say, to hear music the general does not greatly
  CASSIO. Prithee, keep up thy quillets. There's a poor piece of gold
    for thee. If the gentlewoman that attends the general's wife be
    stirring, tell her there's one Cassio entreats her a little favor
  CLOWN. She is stirring, sir. If she will stir hither, I shall seem
  IAGO. You have not been abed, then?
  CASSIO. Why, no; the day had broke
    And I'll devise a mean to draw the Moor
    Out of the way, that your converse and business
    And needs no other suitor but his likings
    To take the safest occasion by the front
A room in the castle.
Enter Othello, Iago, and Gentlemen.
  OTHELLO. These letters give, Iago, to the pilot,
    And by him do my duties to the Senate.
    That done, I will be walking on the works;
    Repair there to me.
The garden of the castle.
    As if the cause were his.
    He shall in strangeness stand no farther off
    That policy may either last so long,
    I give thee warrant of thy place, assure thee,
    To the last article. My lord shall never rest;
    For thy solicitor shall rather die
                Enter Othello and Iago, at a distance.
    I prithee, call him back.
  OTHELLO. Not now, sweet Desdemona; some other time.
  DESDEMONA. Tomorrow dinner then?
    I meet the captains at the citadel.
  DESDEMONA. Why then tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn,
    I prithee, name the time, but let it not
    Save that, they say, the wars must make example
    Out of their best- is not almost a fault
    Tell me, Othello. I wonder in my soul,
  OTHELLO. Prithee, no more. Let him come when he will;
    I will deny thee nothing.
  OTHELLO.                     I will deny thee nothing,
    Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
  OTHELLO. Farewell, my Desdemona; I'll come to thee straight.
    But I do love thee! and when I love thee not,
    No further harm.
    As if there were some monster in his thought
    I heard thee say even now, thou like'st not that,
    And when I told thee he was of my counsel
    And didst contract and purse thy brow together,
    As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
    And weigh'st thy words before thou givest them breath,
    Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more;
    They're close dilations, working from the heart,
  IAGO.                    Men should be what they seem;
    Or those that be not, would they might seem none!
  OTHELLO. Certain, men should be what they seem.
  IAGO. Why then I think Cassio's an honest man.
  OTHELLO. Nay, yet there's more in this.
    I prithee, speak to me as to thy thinkings,
    Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false;
    Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
    It is the green-eyed monster, which doth mock
    Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend
    To follow still the changes of the moon
    When I shall turn the business of my soul
    Where virtue is, these are more virtuous.
    And on the proof, there is no more but this-
    To show the love and duty that I bear you
    In Venice they do let heaven see the pranks
    They dare not show their husbands; their best conscience
  IAGO. She did deceive her father, marrying you;
    She loved them most.
  IAGO.                                  Why, go to then.
    To seel her father's eyes up close as oak-
  OTHELLO.                   I am bound to thee forever.
  IAGO. Ay, there's the point, as- to be bold with you-
    To scan this thing no further; leave it to time.
    Much will be seen in that. In the meantime,
    I'ld whistle her off and let her down the wind
    Into the vale of years- yet that's not much-
    Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,
    That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
    And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad,
    And live upon the vapor of a dungeon,
    Than keep a corner in the thing I love
    For others' uses. Yet, 'tis the plague of great ones:
    Prerogatived are they less than the base;
    Even then this forked plague is fated to us
    If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself!
  DESDEMONA.            How now, my dear Othello!
    Your dinner, and the generous islanders
            He puts the handkerchief from him, and she drops it.
                                        Exeunt Othello and Desdemona.
    This was her first remembrance from the Moor.
    Woo'd me to steal it; but she so loves the token,
    To kiss and talk to. I'll have the work ta'en out,
    Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona,
    And, to the advantage, I being here took't up.
    Are to the jealous confirmations strong
    Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,
    Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
    But with a little act upon the blood
    Burn like the mines of sulphur. I did say so.
                          Re-enter Othello.
    Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,
    Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
  OTHELLO. Avaunt! be gone! Thou hast set me on the rack.
    I slept the next night well, was free and merry;
  OTHELLO. I had been happy if the general camp,
    Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content!
    Farewell the plumed troop and the big wars
    Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,
    The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife,
    Farewell! Othello's occupation's gone!
    Be sure of it. Give me the ocular proof;
    Or, by the worth of man's eternal soul,
  OTHELLO. Make me to see't; or at the least so prove it,
    That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
  OTHELLO.                       By the world,
    As mine own face. If there be cords or knives,
    Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on?
    To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then,
    If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
    More than their own! What then? how then?
    Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
    Which lead directly to the door of truth,
  IAGO. I do not like the office;
    That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs;
    And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
    Cry, "O sweet creature!" and then kiss me hard,
    As if he pluck'd up kisses by the roots,
    That grew upon my lips; then laid his leg
    Over my thigh, and sigh'd and kiss'd; and then
    Cried, "Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!"
  IAGO. And this may help to thicken other proofs
    It speaks against her with the other proofs.
  OTHELLO. O, that the slave had forty thousand lives!
  OTHELLO. Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea,
    To the Propontic and the Hellespont,
    Swallow them up. Now, by yond marble heaven,
    In the due reverence of a sacred vow                      Kneels.
    To wrong'd Othello's service! Let him command,
    And will upon the instant put thee to't:
    Within these three days let me hear thee say
    For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.
Before the castle.
    and say he lies here or he lies there, were to lie in mine own
  CLOWN. I will catechize the world for him; that is, make questions
    and by them answer.
  DESDEMONA. Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I have moved my
  CLOWN. To do this is within the compass of man's wit, and therefore
    I will attempt the doing it.                                Exit.
  DESDEMONA. Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
  DESDEMONA. Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
                            Enter Othello.
    Did an Egyptian to my mother give;
    'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father
    Or made a gift of it, my father's eye
    Should hold her loathed and his spirits should hunt
  OTHELLO. 'Tis true; there's magic in the web of it.
    A sibyl, that had number'd in the world
    In her prophetic fury sew'd the work;
    The worms were hallow'd that did breed the silk,
    And it was dyed in mummy which the skillful
  OTHELLO. Most veritable; therefore look to't well.
  OTHELLO. Is't lost? is't gone? speak, is it out o' the way?
  OTHELLO. Fetch me the handkerchief, my mind misgives.
    Sure there's some wonder in this handkerchief;
    I am most unhappy in the loss of it.
    They eat us hungerly, and when they are full
  IAGO. There is no other way; 'tis she must do't.
    And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.
  DESDEMONA. How now, good Cassio! What's the news with you?
    Whom I with all the office of my heart
    So shall I clothe me in a forced content
    And shut myself up in some other course
    And stood within the blank of his displeasure
  IAGO. Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon,
    When it hath blown his ranks into the air
    And, like the devil, from his very arm
    Puff'd his own brother. And can he be angry?
    Something of moment then. I will go meet him.
  DESDEMONA. I prithee, do so.                             Exit Iago.
    Either from Venice or some unhatch'd practice
    Though great ones are their object. 'Tis even so;
    Our other healthful members even to that sense
    Nor of them look for such observancy
    As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
    But now I find I had suborn'd the witness,
  DESDEMONA. Alas the day, I never gave him cause!
    They are not ever jealous for the cause,
    But jealous for they are jealous. 'Tis a monster
  DESDEMONA. Heaven keep that monster from Othello's mind!
    More tedious than the dial eight score times?
    To the felt absence now I feel a cause.
    Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth,
    From whence you have them. You are jealous now
    I like the work well. Ere it be demanded-
  CASSIO. I do attend here on the general;
    I pray you, bring me on the way a little,
Cyprus. Before the castle.
Enter Othello and Iago.
    It is hypocrisy against the devil.
    The devil their virtue tempts and they tempt heaven.
  IAGO. So they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip.
  OTHELLO. What then?
  IAGO. Why, then, 'tis hers, my lord, and being hers,
    But for the handkerchief-
    As doth the raven o'er the infected house,
    Who having, by their own importunate suit,
    Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose
    But they must blab-
  OTHELLO. Lie with her! lie on her! We say lie on her, when they
    first, to be hanged, and then to confess. I tremble at it.
    My lord, I say! Othello!
  CASSIO. What's the matter?
  CASSIO. Rub him about the temples.
  IAGO. There's many a beast then in a populous city,
    Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better.
    O, 'tis the spite of hell, the fiend's arch-mock,
    Cassio came hither. I shifted him away,
    And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns,
    For I will make him tell the tale anew,
                                                     Othello retires.
    Buys herself bread and clothes. It is a creature
    That dotes on Cassio, as 'tis the strumpet's plague
    From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.
    As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad;
    Quite in the wrong. How do you now, lieutenant?
  CASSIO. The worser that you give me the addition
  CASSIO. I marry her! What? A customer! I prithee, bear some charity
  IAGO. Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.
  CASSIO. Prithee, say true.
  CASSIO. This is the monkey's own giving out. She is persuaded I
  OTHELLO. Iago beckons me; now he begins the story.
    the other day talking on the sea bank with certain Venetians, and
    thither comes the bauble, and, by this hand, she falls me thus
  CASSIO. 'Tis such another fitchew! marry, a perfumed one.
  BIANCA. Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you mean by
    take it. I must take out the work? A likely piece of work that
    there! This is some minx's token, and I must take out the work?
  CASSIO. Faith, I must; she'll rail i' the street else.
  IAGO. Will you sup there?
  CASSIO. Prithee, come; will you?
  OTHELLO. [Advancing.] How shall I murther him, Iago?
  IAGO. And did you see the handkerchief?
  IAGO. Yours, by this hand. And to see how he prizes the foolish
    and it hurts my hand. O, the world hath not a sweeter creature.
    needle, an admirable musician. O, she will sing the savageness
  IAGO. She's the worse for all this.
  OTHELLO. O, a thousand, a thousand times. And then, of so gentle a
  OTHELLO. Nay, that's certain. But yet the pity of it, Iago!
    O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!
  IAGO. Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed, even the bed
  OTHELLO. Good, good, the justice of it pleases, very good.
    Come from the Duke. And, see your wife is with him.
  LODOVICO. God save the worthy general!
  OTHELLO. I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.
                                         Opens the letter, and reads.
  DESDEMONA. And what's the news, good cousin Lodovico?
  DESDEMONA. Cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord
  LODOVICO. He did not call; he's busy in the paper.
    Is there division 'twixt my lord and Cassio?
    To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.
  LODOVICO.                     May be the letter moved him;
    For, as I think, they do command him home,
  DESDEMONA.                         Why, sweet Othello?
    If that the earth could teem with woman's tears,
    I'll send for you anon. Sir, I obey the mandate,
    I do entreat that we may sup together.
  LODOVICO. Is this the noble Moor whom our full Senate
    Call all in all sufficient? This the nature
    Could neither graze nor pierce?
  IAGO. He's that he is. I may not breathe my censure
    That stroke would prove the worst!
    Or did the letters work upon his blood,
A room in the castle.
Enter Othello and Emilia.
  OTHELLO. You have seen nothing, then?
  OTHELLO. Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.
  EMILIA. But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
    Each syllable that breath made up between them.
  OTHELLO. What, did they never whisper?
  OTHELLO. Nor send you out o' the way?
    Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other,
    Let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse!
    There's no man happy; the purest of their wives
  OTHELLO.              Bid her come hither; go.         Exit Emilia.
  OTHELLO.                               Pray, chuck, come hither.
    Leave procreants alone and shut the door;
    But not the words.
    Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
    Should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double-damn'd;
  DESDEMONA. Alas the heavy day! Why do you weep?
    Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
    If haply you my father do suspect
    To try me with affliction, had they rain'd
    Steep'd me in poverty to the very lips,
    A fixed figure for the time of scorn
    But there, where I have garner'd up my heart,
    Where either I must live or bear no life;
    The fountain from the which my current runs,
    Or else dries up; to be discarded thence!
    To knot and gender in! Turn thy complexion there,
    Ay, there, look grim as hell!
  OTHELLO. O, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,
    That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne'er been born!
    Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
    Is hush'd within the hollow mine of earth,
    From any other foul unlawful touch
  OTHELLO.                         I cry you mercy then;
    That married with Othello. [Raises his voice.] You, mistress,
    That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
    And keep the gate of hell!
    We have done our course; there's money for your pains.
    I pray you, turn the key, and keep our counsel.             Exit.
  EMILIA. Good madam, what's the matter with my lord?
    But what should go by water. Prithee, tonight
    And call thy husband hither.
  IAGO.                      What's the matter, lady?
  IAGO. Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day!
    Her father and her country and her friends,
  IAGO. Fie, there is no such man; it is impossible.
  DESDEMONA. If any such there be, heaven pardon him!
    To lash the rascals naked through the world
    Even from the east to the west!
  EMILIA. O, fie upon them! Some such squire he was
    That turn'd your wit the seamy side without,
    And made you to suspect me with the Moor.
    Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,
    Delighted them in any other form,
    It doth abhor me now I speak the word;
    To do the act that might the addition earn
    Not the world's mass of vanity could make me.
    The business of the state does him offense,
  DESDEMONA. If 'twere no other-
    Hark, how these instruments summon to supper!
    The messengers of Venice stay the meat.
  IAGO. What in the contrary?
    rather, as it seems to me now, keepest from me all conveniency
    than suppliest me with the least advantage of hope. I will indeed
    performances are no kin together.
    received them and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden
  IAGO. Why, now I see there's mettle in thee; and even from this
    instant do build on thee a better opinion than ever before. Give
    in thee indeed, which I have greater reason to believe now than
    thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take me from
  IAGO. Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to depute
    Cassio in Othello's place.
  RODERIGO. Is that true? Why then Othello and Desdemona return again
  IAGO. O, no; he goes into Mauritania, and takes away with him the
    accident; wherein none can be so determinate as the removing of
  IAGO. Why, by making him uncapable of Othello's place; knocking out
    tonight with a harlotry, and thither will I go to him. He knows
    thence, which his will fashion to fall out between twelve and
    it on him. It is now high supper-time, and the night grows to
  RODERIGO. I will hear further reason for this.
Another room in the castle.
Enter Othello, Lodovico, Desdemona, Emilia, and Attendants.
  LODOVICO. I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.
  OTHELLO. Get you to bed on the instant; I will be returned
    forthwith. Dismiss your attendant there; look it be done.
                            Exeunt Othello, Lodovico, and Attendants.
  DESDEMONA. It was his bidding; therefore, good Emilia,
    Prithee, unpin me- have grace and favor in them.
  EMILIA. I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.
    If I do die before thee, prithee shroud me
  DESDEMONA. My mother had a maid call'd Barbary;
    And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee, dispatch.
    Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.
        Her salt tears fell from her, and soften'd the stones-"
    Lay be these-
    Prithee, hie thee; he'll come anon-
  EMILIA. It's the wind.
        "I call'd my love false love; but what said he then?
    So get thee gone; good night. Mine eyes do itch;
  EMILIA.                   'Tis neither here nor there.
  DESDEMONA. I have heard it said so. O, these men, these men!
    That there be women do abuse their husbands
  DESDEMONA. Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
  EMILIA. Nor I neither by this heavenly light; I might do't as well
    i' the dark.
  DESDEMONA. Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
    petty exhibition; but, for the whole world- why, who would not
    For the whole world.
  EMILIA. Why, the wrong is but a wrong i' the world; and having the
  DESDEMONA. I do not think there is any such woman.
  EMILIA. Yes, a dozen, and as many to the vantage as would store the
      world they played for.
    But I do think it is their husbands' faults
    If wives do fall; say that they slack their duties
    Throwing restraint upon us, or say they strike us,
    Their wives have sense like them; they see and smell
    And have their palates both for sweet and sour,
    As husbands have. What is it that they do
    When they change us for others? Is it sport?
    Then let them use us well; else let them know,
    The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
  RODERIGO. I have no great devotion to the deed;
  IAGO. I have rubb'd this young quat almost to the sense,
    And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
    Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
    That makes me ugly; and besides, the Moor
    May unfold me to him; there stand I in much peril.
            Iago from behind wounds Cassio in the leg, and exit.
  CASSIO. I am maim'd forever. Help, ho! Murther! Murther!
                            Enter Othello.
  CASSIO. What, ho! No watch? No passage? Murther! Murther!
  GRATIANO. 'Tis some mischance; the cry is very direful.
    To come in to the cry without more help.
  IAGO. Who's there? Whose noise is this that cries on murther?
  IAGO.                                       What's the matter?
  GRATIANO. This is Othello's ancient, as I take it.
  CASSIO. I think that one of them is hereabout,
    [To Lodovico and Gratiano.] What are you there?
  CASSIO. That's one of them.
  IAGO.                       O murtherous slave! O villain!
  IAGO. Kill men i' the dark! Where be these bloody thieves?
    How silent is this town! Ho! Murther! Murther!
  IAGO. How is't, brother?
  BIANCA. What is the matter, ho? Who is't that cried?
    Who they should be that have thus mangled you?
      the chair.
    I'll fetch the general's surgeon. [To Bianca.] For you, mistress,
  CASSIO. None in the world; nor do I know the man.
  IAGO. [To Bianca.] What, look you pale? O, bear him out o' the air.
    Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?
  EMILIA. 'Las, what's the matter? What's the matter, husband?
  IAGO. Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
  IAGO. This is the fruit of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,
  BIANCA. He supp'd at my house; but I therefore shake not.
  EMILIA. Fie, fie upon thee, strumpet!
  EMILIA.                      As I! foh! fie upon thee!
    Come, mistress, you must tell's another tale.
    Emilia, run you to the citadel,
    Will you go on? [Aside.] This is the night
    That either makes me or fordoes me quite.                 Exeunt.
A bedchamber in the castle. Desdemona in bed asleep; a light burning.
Enter Othello.
  OTHELLO. It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul.
    It is the cause. Yet I'll not shed her blood,
    Put out the light, and then put out the light.
    If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
    I know not where is that Promethean heat
    That can thy light relume. When I have pluck'd the rose,
    It must needs wither; I'll smell it on the tree.      Kisses her.
    Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
    And love thee after. One more, and this the last;
    But they are cruel tears; this sorrow's heavenly,
  DESDEMONA. Who's there? Othello?
  DESDEMONA. And yet I fear you, for you are fatal then
    Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
  DESDEMONA. I will so. What's the matter?
  OTHELLO. That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee
    Send for the man, and ask him.
    Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin,
    Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
    A murther, which I thought a sacrifice.
    I saw the handkerchief.
  DESDEMONA.                He found it then;
    I never gave it him. Send for him hither;
  OTHELLO. That he hath used thee.
    Had stomach for them all.
  OTHELLO.                     Being done, there is no pause.
    I would not have thee linger in thy pain.
  OTHELLO.                                      Who's there?
    Still as the grave. Shall she come in? were't good?
    Of sun and moon, and that the affrighted globe
  OTHELLO. I had forgot thee. O, come in, Emilia.
    Soft, by and by. Let me the curtains draw.
    Where art thou?                                 Unlocks the door.
                    What's the matter with thee now?
  EMILIA. O, my good lord, yonder's foul murthers done!
  OTHELLO. It is the very error of the moon;
  OTHELLO. Not Cassio kill'd! Then murther's out of tune,
  DESDEMONA. O, falsely, falsely murther'd!
  OTHELLO. Why, how should she be murther'd?
  EMILIA. She said so; I must needs report the truth.
  EMILIA.                    O, the more angel she,
    And you the blacker devil!
    If heaven would make me such another world
    An honest man he is, and hates the slime
    I say thy husband. Dost understand the word?
    Rot half a grain a day! He lies to the heart.
    I care not for thy sword; I'll make thee known,
    The Moor hath kill'd my mistress! Murther, murther!
              Enter Montano, Gratiano, Iago, and others.
  MONTANO. What is the matter? How now, general?
    That men must lay their murthers on your neck.
  GRATIANO. What is the matter?
    My mistress here lies murther'd in her bed-
  EMILIA. And your reports have set the murther on.
    I thought so then. I'll kill myself for grief.
  OTHELLO. O! O! O!                                 Falls on the bed.
  EMILIA.           Nay, lay thee down and roar;
    For thou hast kill'd the sweetest innocent
    I scarce did know you, uncle; there lies your niece,
    Whose breath indeed these hands have newly stopp'd.
  GRATIANO. Poor Desdemon! I am glad thy father's dead.
    That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
    My father gave my mother.
    No, I will speak as liberal as the north;
    Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,
    O murtherous coxcomb! What should such a fool
  OTHELLO.                  Are there not stones in heaven
    Which I have here recover'd from the Moor.
    Come, guard the door without; let him not pass,
    But kill him rather. I'll after that same villain,
    For 'tis a damned slave.       Exeunt all but Othello and Emilia.
  OTHELLO.                   I am not valiant neither,
    Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan,
    Moor, she was chaste; she loved thee, cruel Moor;
  OTHELLO. I have another weapon in this chamber;
    It is a sword of Spain, the ice-brook's temper-
  GRATIANO. [Within.] If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear.
  OTHELLO. Look in upon me then, and speak with me,
    Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.
  GRATIANO. What is the matter?
    Upon a soldier's thigh. I have seen the day
    Man but a rush against Othello's breast,
    And he retires. Where should Othello go?
    From the possession of this heavenly sight!
  OTHELLO. That's he that was Othello. Here I am.
  LODOVICO. Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.
    If that thou be'st a devil, I cannot kill thee.      Wounds Iago.
  OTHELLO. I am not sorry neither. I'ld have thee live,
  LODOVICO. O thou Othello, that wert once so good,
    Fall'n in the practice of a damned slave,
    What shall be said to thee?
    An honorable murtherer, if you will,
    Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,
    And here another. The one of them imports
  CASSIO.             Most heathenish and most gross!
  LODOVICO. Now here's another discontented paper,
    But that, belike, Iago in the interim
  OTHELLO.                     O the pernicious caitiff!
    That there he dropp'd it for a special purpose
    Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came
    If there be any cunning cruelty
    Till that the nature of your fault be known
    To the Venetian state. Come, bring away.
    I have done the state some service, and they know't.
    When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
    Perplex'd in the extreme; of one whose hand,
    Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away
    Albeit unused to the melting mood,
    Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees
    Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,
    I took by the throat the circumcised dog
  OTHELLO. I kiss'd thee ere I kill'd thee. No way but this,
                                          Falls on the bed, and dies.
    More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea!
    Look on the tragic loading of this bed;
    Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house,
    And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
    For they succeed on you. To you, Lord Governor,
    Remains the censure of this hellish villain,
    The time, the place, the torture. O, enforce it!
    Myself will straight aboard, and to the state
  JOHN OF GAUNT, Duke of Lancaster - uncle to the King
  EDMUND LANGLEY, Duke of York - uncle to the King
  DUKE OF AUMERLE, son of the Duke of York
  LADY attending on the Queen
    Groom, and other Attendants
Enter RICHARD, JOHN OF GAUNT, with other NOBLES and attendants
    Brought hither Henry Hereford, thy bold son,
    Here to make good the boist'rous late appeal,
    Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
    Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
    If he appeal the Duke on ancient malice,
  KING RICHARD. Then call them to our presence: face to face
    The accuser and the accused freely speak.
    High-stomach'd are they both and full of ire,
    In rage, deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.
  MOWBRAY. Each day still better other's happiness
    Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,
    As well appeareth by the cause you come;
    Namely, to appeal each other of high treason.
    Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
  BOLINGBROKE. First-heaven be the record to my speech!
    In the devotion of a subject's love,
    Tend'ring the precious safety of my prince,
    And free from other misbegotten hate,
    Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
    Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
    The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
    Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
    'Tis not the trial of a woman's war,
    First, the fair reverence of your Highness curbs me
    Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
    Or any other ground inhabitable
  BOLINGBROKE. Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,
    Disclaiming here the kindred of the King;
    Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.
    If guilty dread have left thee so much strength
    As to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop.
    By that and all the rites of knighthood else
    Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,
    I'll answer thee in any fair degree
    Or here, or elsewhere to the furthest verge
    That all the treasons for these eighteen years
    Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.
    Further I say, and further will maintain
    That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death,
    Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth,
    And, by the glorious worth of my descent,
    Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,
    As he is but my father's brother's son,
    Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.
    Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.
    The other part reserv'd I by consent,
    The honourable father to my foe,
    But ere I last receiv'd the sacrament
    This is my fault. As for the rest appeal'd,
    It issues from the rancour of a villain,
    Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom.
    We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.
    Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.
    Pierc'd to the soul with slander's venom'd spear,
    Shall I seem crest-fallen in my father's sight?
    Justice design the victor's chivalry.
    Be ready to direct these home alarms.                 Exeunt
Enter JOHN OF GAUNT with the DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER
  GAUNT. Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood
    To stir against the butchers of his life!
    Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
    Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven;
    Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth,
  DUCHESS. Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
    Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;
    Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt;
    That mettle, that self mould, that fashion'd thee,
    Made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest,
    In some large measure to thy father's death
    In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
    Who was the model of thy father's life.
    In suff'ring thus thy brother to be slaught'red,
    Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,
    Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee.
  GAUNT. God's is the quarrel; for God's substitute,
    Hath caus'd his death; the which if wrongfully,
  DUCHESS. Where then, alas, may I complain myself?
  GAUNT. To God, the widow's champion and defence.
  DUCHESS. Why then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.
    Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold
    Or, if misfortune miss the first career,
    That they may break his foaming courser's back
    And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
    Farewell, old Gaunt; thy sometimes brother's wife,
    As much good stay with thee as go with me!
    Not with the empty hollowness, but weight.
    Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.
    Alack, and what shall good old York there see
    And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
    Therefore commend me; let him not come there
    The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.          Exeunt
Enter the LORD MARSHAL and the DUKE OF AUMERLE
    Stays but the summons of the appelant's trumpet.
  AUMERLE. Why then, the champions are prepar'd, and stay
     The trumpets sound, and the KING enters with his nobles,
     GAUNT, BUSHY, BAGOT, GREEN, and others. When they are set,
    To swear him in the justice of his cause.
  MARSHAL. In God's name and the King's, say who thou art,
    As so defend thee heaven and thy valour!
    Who hither come engaged by my oath-
    Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me;
    And, by the grace of God and this mine arm,
    Both who he is and why he cometh hither
    Depose him in the justice of his cause.
  MARSHAL. What is thy name? and wherefore com'st thou hither
    Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!
    Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,
    Except the Marshal and such officers
    Appointed to direct these fair designs.
    Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.
    As confident as is the falcon's flight
    The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet.
    O thou, the earthly author of my blood,
    And furbish new the name of John o' Gaunt,
    Even in the lusty haviour of his son.
  GAUNT. God in thy good cause make thee prosperous!
    Be swift like lightning in the execution,
    Fall like amazing thunder on the casque
    Take from my mouth the wish of happy years.
    Order the trial, Marshal, and begin.
    Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!
    To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
    And dares him to set forward to the fight.
    Attending but the signal to begin.
    Stay, the King hath thrown his warder down.
  KING RICHARD. Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,
    And both return back to their chairs again.
    Withdraw with us; and let the trumpets sound
    While we return these dukes what we decree.
    A long flourish, while the KING consults his Council
    And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
    And for we think the eagle-winged pride
    Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep;
    But tread the stranger paths of banishment.
  KING RICHARD. Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
    Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.
    As to be cast forth in the common air,
    The language I have learnt these forty years,
    That knows no touch to tune the harmony.
    What is thy sentence, then, but speechless death,
  KING RICHARD. It boots thee not to be compassionate;
  KING RICHARD. Return again, and take an oath with thee.
    Swear by the duty that you owe to God,
    Our part therein we banish with yourselves,
    To keep the oath that we administer:
    Embrace each other's love in banishment;
    Nor never look upon each other's face;
    By this time, had the King permitted us,
    One of our souls had wand'red in the air,
    Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm;
    My name be blotted from the book of life,
    And all too soon, I fear, the King shall rue.
    Save back to England, an the world's my way.            Exit
  KING RICHARD. Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
    Hath from the number of his banish'd years
    End in a word: such is the breath of Kings.
    But little vantage shall I reap thereby,
    For ere the six years that he hath to spend
    Can change their moons and bring their times about,
    Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?
    You urg'd me as a judge; but I had rather
    You would have bid me argue like a father.
    And in the sentence my own life destroy'd.
    When the tongue's office should be prodigal
    To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.
  BOLINGBROKE. Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make
    I wander from the jewels that I love.
    To foreign passages; and in the end,
  GAUNT. All places that the eye of heaven visits
    Think not the King did banish thee,
    But thou the King. Woe doth the heavier sit
    Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour,
    And not the King exil'd thee; or suppose
    Suppose the singing birds musicians,
    The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd,
    By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
    Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
    O, no! the apprehension of the good
    Gives but the greater feeling to the worse.
    Than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore.
  GAUNT. Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way.
    My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!
Enter the KING, with BAGOT and GREEN, at one door;
and the DUKE OF AUMERLE at another
    But to the next high way, and there I left him.
  AUMERLE. Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind,
    Which then blew bitterly against our faces,
    Awak'd the sleeping rheum, and so by chance
    Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
    Marry, would the word 'farewell' have length'ned hours
    Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.
    Observ'd his courtship to the common people;
    How he did seem to dive into their hearts
    Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles
    As 'twere to banish their affects with him.
    And had the tribute of his supple knee,
  GREEN. Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts!
    Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,
    Ere further leisure yicld them further means
    For their advantage and your Highness' loss.
    Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
    They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold,
    And send them after to supply our wants;
  KING RICHARD. Now put it, God, in the physician's mind
    To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
Enter JOHN OF GAUNT, sick, with the DUKE OF YORK, etc.
  GAUNT. Will the King come, that I may breathe my last
  GAUNT. O, but they say the tongues of dying men
    Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain;
    For they breathe truth that breathe their words -in pain.
    Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose;
    More are men's ends mark'd than their lives before.
    The setting sun, and music at the close,
    As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,
  YORK. No; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds,
    As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond,
    Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity-
    So it be new, there's no respect how vile-
    For violent fires soon burn out themselves;
    With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder;
    This other Eden, demi-paradise,
    Against infection and the hand of war,
    This precious stone set in the silver sea,
    Which serves it in the office of a wall,
    Against the envy of less happier lands;
    Fear'd by their breed, and famous by their birth,
    Renowned for their deeds as far from home,
    As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry
    Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son;
    Dear for her reputation through the world,
    England, bound in with the triumphant sea,
    Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege
    That England, that was wont to conquer others,
    Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,
    How happy then were my ensuing death!
    For young hot colts being rag'd do rage the more.
    The pleasure that some fathers feed upon
    And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt.
    Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
  KING RICHARD. Can sick men play so nicely with their names?
    I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.
  GAUNT. O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.
  KING RICHARD. I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.
  GAUNT. Now He that made me knows I see thee ill;
    Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.
    Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure
    Of those physicians that first wounded thee:
    Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd,
    Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,
    Thy state of law is bondslave to the law;
    Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood
    Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,
  GAUNT. O, Spare me not, my brother Edward's son,
    For that I was his father Edward's son;
    That blood already, like the pelican,
    My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul-
    Join with the present sickness that I have;
    To crop at once a too long withered flower.
    Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!
    Convey me to my bed, then to my grave.
    Love they to live that love and honour have.
  KING RICHARD. And let them die that age and sullens have;
    For both hast thou, and both become the grave.
    As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.
  YORK. Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!
    But only they have privilege to live.
    And for these great affairs do ask some charge,
    Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke
    I am the last of noble Edward's sons,
    Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first.
    Accomplish'd with the number of thy hours;
    But when he frown'd, it was against the French
    Which his triumphant father's hand had won.
    But bloody with the enemies of his kin.
  KING RICHARD. Why, uncle, what's the matter?
    Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
    Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day;
    Call in the letters patents that he hath
  YORK. I'll not be by the while. My liege, farewell.
    What will ensue hereof there's none can tell;
    That their events can never fall out good.              Exit
  KING RICHARD. Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight;
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.
    That speaks thy words again to do thee harm!
  WILLOUGHBY. Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?
    By flatterers; and what they will inform,
    That will the King severely prosecute
    And quite lost their hearts; the nobles hath he find
    For ancient quarrels and quite lost their hearts.
    More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.
  ROSS. The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.
  ROSS. He hath not money for these Irish wars,
    But by the robbing of the banish'd Duke.
    Yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm;
    We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,
  ROSS. We see the very wreck that we must suffer;
    And unavoided is the danger now
    For suffering so the causes of our wreck.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death
    How near the tidings of our comfort is.
    Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore be bold.
    That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,
    His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury,
    All these, well furnish'd by the Duke of Britaine,
    Are making hither with all due expedience,
    And shortly mean to touch our northern shore.
    Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay
    The first departing of the King for Ireland.
    If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
    Redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown,
    Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt,
  ROSS. To horse, to horse! Urge doubts to them that fear.
  WILLOUGHBY. Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.
    You promis'd, when you parted with the King,
  QUEEN. To please the King, I did; to please myself
    More than with parting from my lord the King.
    Persuades me it is otherwise. Howe'er it be,
    From some forefather grief; mine is not so,
    Or something hath the nothing that I grieve;
    I hope the King is not yet shipp'd for Ireland.
    With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.
    And all the rest revolted faction traitors?
  GREEN. We have; whereupon the Earl of Worcester
    And all the household servants fled with him
  QUEEN. So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,
    And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother,
    Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,
  GREEN. Here comes the Duke of York.
    Comfort's in heaven; and we are on the earth,
    Whilst others come to make him lose at home.
    Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;
    The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold
    Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;
    To-day, as I came by, I called there-
    But I shall grieve you to report the rest.
  SERVINGMAN. An hour before I came, the Duchess died.
    The King had cut off my head with my brother's.
    What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland?
    How shall we do for money for these wars?
    Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts,
    And bring away the armour that is there.
    If I know how or which way to order these affairs
    And duty bids defend; t'other again
    Is my kinsman, whom the King hath wrong'd,
    Proportionable to the enemy
  GREEN. Besides, our nearness to the King in love
    Is near the hate of those love not the King.
  BAGOT. And that is the wavering commons; for their love
    Lies in their purses; and whoso empties them,
    By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.
  BUSHY. Wherein the King stands generally condemn'd.
  BAGOT. If judgment lie in them, then so do we,
    Because we ever have been near the King.
    The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.
  BUSHY. Thither will I with you; for little office
    Will the hateful commons perform for us,
  GREEN. Alas, poor Duke! the task he undertakes
    Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome;
    Making the hard way sweet and delectable.
    But theirs is sweet'ned with the hope to have
    Than hope enjoy'd. By this the weary lords
    Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done
    Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Why, is he not with the Queen?
  PERCY. No, my good lord; he hath forsook the court,
    The household of the King.
    He was not so resolv'd when last we spake together.
    To offer service to the Duke of Hereford;
    What power the Duke of York had levied there;
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Then learn to know him now; this is the Duke.
  BOLINGBROKE. I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure
    Keeps good old York there with his men of war?
  PERCY. There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees,
    And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour-
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,
  BOLINGBROKE. Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor;
    From the most gracious regent of this land,
    To take advantage of the absent time,
    But then more 'why?'-why have they dar'd to march
    Com'st thou because the anointed King is hence?
    Why, foolish boy, the King is left behind,
    As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself
    Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
    From forth the ranks of many thousand French,
    O, then how quickly should this arm of mine,
    Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise the
  YORK. Even in condition of the worst degree-
    Before the expiration of thy time,
    You are my father, for methinks in you
    I see old Gaunt alive. O, then, my father,
    He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father
    To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.
    My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold;
    And these and all are all amiss employ'd.
    And therefore personally I lay my claim
    But for his own; and for the right of that
  YORK. Well, well, I see the issue of these arms.
    Unto the sovereign mercy of the King;
    Unless you please to enter in the castle,
    And there repose you for this night.
    To Bristow Castle, which they say is held
    By Bushy, Bagot, and their complices,
    The caterpillars of the commonwealth,
    And hardly kept our countrymen together,
    And yet we hear no tidings from the King;
  SALISBURY. Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman;
    The King reposeth all his confidence in thee.
  CAPTAIN. 'Tis thought the King is dead; we will not stay.
    The bay trees in our country are all wither'd,
    And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;
    The pale-fac'd moon looks bloody on the earth,
    The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,
    The other to enjoy by rage and war.
    These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.
    As well assur'd Richard their King is dead.             Exit
  SALISBURY. Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind,
    Fall to the base earth from the firmament!
    The sun sets weeping in the lowly west,
  BOLINGBROKE. Bring forth these men.
    From off my hands, here in the view of men
    Broke the possession of a royal bed,
    And stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks
    Near to the King in blood, and near in love
    Eating the bitter bread of banishment,
    To show the world I am a gentleman.
    Condemns you to the death. See them delivered over
    To execution and the hand of death.
  BUSHY. More welcome is the stroke of death to me
    And plague injustice with the pains of hell.
  BOLINGBROKE. My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch'd.
           Exeunt NORTHUMBERLAND, and others, with the prisoners
    Uncle, you say the Queen is at your house;
Drums. Flourish and colours. Enter the KING, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE,
  KING RICHARD. Barkloughly Castle can they this at hand?
  AUMERLE. Yea, my lord. How brooks your Grace the air
    After your late tossing on the breaking seas?
    Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,
    Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs.
    As a long-parted mother with her child
    So weeping-smiling greet I thee, my earth,
    And do thee favours with my royal hands.
    And heavy-gaited toads, lie in their way,
    Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet
    Which with usurping steps do trample thee;
    And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,
    Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder,
    This earth shall have a feeling, and these stones
    That when the searching eye of heaven is hid,
    Behind the globe, that lights the lower world,
    He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines
    The cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs,
    Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves?
    Who all this while hath revell'd in the night,
    Whilst we were wand'ring with the Antipodes,
    Shall see us rising in our throne, the east,
    Not able to endure the sight of day,
    Not all the water in the rough rude sea
    Can wash the balm off from an anointed king;
    The deputy elected by the Lord.
    Weak men must fall; for heaven still guards the right.
  SALISBURY. Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,
    For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead,
  KING RICHARD. But now the blood of twenty thousand men
    Did triumph in my face, and they are fled;
    And, till so much blood thither come again,
    Is not the King's name twenty thousand names?
    At thy great glory. Look not to the ground,
    They break their faith to God as well as us.
    To bear the tidings of calamity.
    Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,
    As if the world were all dissolv'd to tears,
    So high above his limits swells the rage
    White-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps
    Strive to speak big, and clap their female joints
    Thy very beadsmen learn to bend their bows
    Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? Where is Bagot?
    That they have let the dangerous enemy
    If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it.
    I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.
  SCROOP. Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.
    Would they make peace? Terrible hell make war
    Upon their spotted souls for this offence!
    Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate.
    Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made
    Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound
    And lie full low, grav'd in the hollow ground.
  AUMERLE. Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?
  SCROOP. Ay, all of them at Bristow lost their heads.
  AUMERLE. Where is the Duke my father with his power?
    Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth.
    Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
    And that small model of the barren earth
    For God's sake let us sit upon the ground
    And tell sad stories of the death of kings:
    Some haunted by the ghosts they have depos'd,
    Some poison'd by their wives, some sleeping kill'd,
    All murder'd-for within the hollow crown
    That rounds the mortal temples of a king
    Keeps Death his court; and there the antic sits,
    Comes at the last, and with a little pin
  CARLISLE. My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes,
    But presently prevent the ways to wail.
    To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,
  AUMERLE. My father hath a power; inquire of him,
    To change blows with thee for our day of doom.
  SCROOP. Men judge by the complexion of the sky
    The state in inclination of the day;
    I play the torturer, by small and small
    To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:
    And all your northern castles yielded up,
    And all your southern gentlemen in arms
      [To AUMERLE] Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth
    Go to Flint Castle; there I'll pine away;
    That power I have, discharge; and let them go
    To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,
    That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
    Discharge my followers; let them hence away,
    Is gone to meet the King, who lately landed
  YORK. It would beseem the Lord Northumberland
    To say 'King Richard.' Alack the heavy day
    For taking so the head, your whole head's length.
  BOLINGBROKE. Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.
  YORK. Take not, good cousin, further than you should,
    Against their will. But who comes here?
    Within the limits of yon lime and stone;
    And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
  NORTHUMBERLAND. O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.
    Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle;
    Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley
    To his most royal person; hither come
    If not, I'll use the advantage of my power
    And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood
    Rain'd from the wounds of slaughtered Englishmen;
    The which how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke
    Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.
           [NORTHUMBERLAND advances to the Castle, with a trumpet]
    Let's march without the noise of threat'ning drum,
    With no less terror than the elements
    Of fire and water, when their thund'ring shock
    At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.
    Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water;
    The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain
    My waters-on the earth, and not on him.
      Parle without, and answer within; then a flourish.
      Enter on the walls, the KING, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE,
    As doth the blushing discontented sun
    From out the fiery portal of the east,
    When he perceives the envious clouds are bent
    To dim his glory and to stain the track
    Of his bright passage to the occident.
    As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth
    To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
    To pay their awful duty to our presence?
    If we be not, show us the hand of God
    Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,
    Have torn their souls by turning them from us,
    Armies of pestilence; and they shall strike
    And threat the glory of my precious crown.
    But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,
    Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons
    Shall ill become the flower of England's face,
    Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace
  NORTHUMBERLAND. The King of Heaven forbid our lord the King
    And by the honourable tomb he swears
    And by the royalties of both your bloods,
    And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,
    And by the worth and honour of himself,
    His coming hither hath no further scope
  KING RICHARD. Northumberland, say thus the King returns:
    His noble cousin is right welcome hither;
    And all the number of his fair demands
    With all the gracious utterance thou hast
    Defiance to the traitor, and so die?
    Till time lend friends, and friends their helpful swords.
    That laid the sentence of dread banishment
    Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat,
    Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.
  KING RICHARD. What must the King do now? Must he submit?
    Or I'll be buried in the king's high way,
    May hourly trample on their sovereign's head;
    For on my heart they tread now whilst I live,
    We'll make foul weather with despised tears;
    Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn
    Or shall we play the wantons with our woes
    As thus: to drop them still upon one place
    Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
    Within the earth; and, therein laid-there lies
    Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. My lord, in the base court he doth attend
    Wanting the manage of unruly jades.
    In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base,
    To come at traitors' calls, and do them grace.
    In the base court? Come down? Down, court! down, king!
          Enter the KING, and his attendants, below
    To make the base earth proud with kissing it.
    Me rather had my heart might feel your love
    That know the strong'st and surest way to get.
    Tears show their love, but want their remedies.
    Cousin, I am too young to be your father,
Enter the QUEEN and two LADIES
    To drive away the heavy thought of care?
  QUEEN. 'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs
    And that my fortune runs against the bias.
    Therefore no dancing, girl; some other sport.
  LADY. Of either, madam.
  QUEEN. Of neither, girl;
    For if of joy, being altogether wanting,
    It doth remember me the more of sorrow;
    Or if of grief, being altogether had,
    And never borrow any tear of thee.
    But stay, here come the gardeners.
    Let's step into the shadow of these trees.
    Which, like unruly children, make their sire
    Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight;
    Give some supportance to the bending twigs.
    Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays
  SERVANT. Why should we, in the compass of a pale,
    When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,
    Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf;
    I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.
  SERVANT. What, are they dead?
    Hath seiz'd the wasteful King. O, what pity is it
    Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit trees,
    Had he done so, himself had home the crown,
  SERVANT. What, think you the King shall be deposed?
    To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's
    What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested the
    To breathe this news; yet what I say is true.
    King Richard, he is in the mighty hold
    But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,
    Besides himself, are all the English peers,
    Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?
    Gard'ner, for telling me these news of woe,
    Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow!
    In the remembrance of a weeping queen.                Exeunt
Enter, as to the Parliament, BOLINGBROKE, AUMERLE, NORTHUMBERLAND, PERCY,
FITZWATER, SURREY, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE, the ABBOT OF WESTMINSTER,
and others; HERALD, OFFICERS, and BAGOT
    Who wrought it with the King, and who perform'd
  BAGOT. Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.
    That reacheth from the restful English Court
    Amongst much other talk that very time
    I heard you say that you had rather refuse
    Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd
    With the attainder of his slanderous lips.
    There is my gage, the manual seal of death
    That marks thee out for hell. I say thou liest,
    To stain the temper of my knightly sword.
  AUMERLE. Excepting one, I would he were the best
    I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spak'st it,
    And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,
    To prove it on thee to the extremest point
    Over the glittering helmet of my foe!
  ANOTHER LORD. I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle;
    And spur thee on with fun as many lies
    Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
  FITZWATER. 'Tis very true; you were in presence then,
    Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do he
    In earth as quiet as thy father's skull.
    In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn;
    Engage it to the trial, if thou dar'st.
    If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,
    To tie thee to my strong correction.
    Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say
    To execute the noble Duke at Calais.
    Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross
    To Italy; and there, at Venice, gave
  BOLINGBROKE. Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom
  YORK. Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to the
    Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields
    To the possession of thy royal hand.
  BOLINGBROKE. In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.
    Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
    Thieves are not judg'd but they are by to hear,
    Although apparent guilt be seen in them;
    And shall the figure of God's majesty,
    The blood of English shall manure the ground,
    It will the woefullest division prove
    May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit?
  BOLINGBROKE. Fetch hither Richard, that in common view
                bearing the regalia
    Before I have shook off the regal thoughts
    The favours of these men. Were they not mine?
    Did they not sometime cry 'All hail!' to me?
    God save the King! Will no man say amen?
    Am I both priest and clerk? Well then, amen.
    God save the King! although I be not he;
    To do what service am I sent for hither?
    Which tired majesty did make thee offer-
  KING RICHARD. Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown.
    That owes two buckets, filling one another;
    The emptier ever dancing in the air,
    The other down, unseen, and full of water.
    They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.
  BOLINGBROKE. Are you contented to resign the crown?
    Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.
    God keep all vows unbroke are made to thee!
    These accusations, and these grievous crimes
    Against the state and profit of this land;
    That, by confessing them, the souls of men
    Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop
    To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst,
    Containing the deposing of a king
    And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,
    Mark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. My lord, dispatch; read o'er these
    And yet salt water blinds them not so much
    But they can see a sort of traitors here.
    I find myself a traitor with the rest;
    T'undeck the pompous body of a king;
    No, not that name was given me at the font-
    But 'tis usurp'd. Alack the heavy day,
    Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke
    Let it command a mirror hither straight,
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. The Commons will not, then, be satisfied.
    When I do see the very book indeed
    Give me that glass, and therein will I read.
    Thou dost beguile me! Was this face the face
    Did keep ten thousand men? Was this the face
    That like the sun did make beholders wink?
    Is this the face which fac'd so many follies
    As brittle as the glory is the face;
                        [Dashes the glass against the ground]
    For there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers.
    Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport-
    And these external manner of laments
    Are merely shadows to the unseen grief
    That swells with silence in the tortur'd soul.
    There lies the substance; and I thank thee, king,
    Me cause to wail, but teachest me the way
    How to lament the cause. I'll beg one boon,
    And then be gone and trouble you no more.
    Were then but subjects; being now a subject,
  BOLINGBROKE. Whither?
  KING RICHARD. Whither you will, so I were from your sights.
  BOLINGBROKE. Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.
                    Exeunt all but the ABBOT OF WESTMINSTER, the
  CARLISLE. The woe's to come; the children yet unborn
    Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
  AUMERLE. You holy clergymen, is there no plot
    To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
    You shall not only take the sacrament
London. A street leading to the Tower
Enter the QUEEN, with her attendants
  QUEEN. This way the King will come; this is the way
    But soft, but see, or rather do not see,
    My fair rose wither. Yet look up, behold,
    Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand;
    Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodg'd in thee,
    From which awak'd, the truth of what we are
    Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet,
    Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France,
    And cloister thee in some religious house.
    And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage
    Take the correction mildly, kiss the rod,
    Which art a lion and the king of beasts?
    Good sometimes queen, prepare thee hence for France.
    In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire
    With good old folks, and let them tell thee tales
    And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs
    Tell thou the lamentable tale of me,
    And send the hearers weeping to their beds;
    For why, the senseless brands will sympathize
    And in compassion weep the fire out;
    For the deposing of a rightful king.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is chang'd;
    You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.
    And, madam, there is order ta'en for you:
    More than it is, ere foul sin gathering head
    Though he divide the realm and give thee half
    And he shall think that thou, which knowest the way
    Being ne'er so little urg'd, another way
    To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. My guilt be on my head, and there an end.
    And then betwixt me and my married wife.
    Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me;
    Part us, Northumberland; I towards the north,
    Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;
    She came adorned hither like sweet May,
  QUEEN. Banish us both, and send the King with me.
  QUEEN. Then whither he goes thither let me go.
  KING RICHARD. So two, together weeping, make one woe.
    Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;
    Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.
  QUEEN. So longest way shall have the longest moans.
  KING RICHARD. Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,
    And piece the way out with a heavy heart.
    Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief.
    Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.            Exeunt
Enter the DUKE OF YORK and the DUCHESS
  DUCHESS. My Lord, you told me you would tell the rest,
    When weeping made you break the story off,
  YORK. Then, as I said, the Duke, great Bolingbroke,
    Whilst all tongues cried 'God save thee, Bolingbroke!'
    You would have thought the very windows spake,
    Through casements darted their desiring eyes
    Upon his visage; and that all the walls
    'Jesu preserve thee! Welcome, Bolingbroke!'
    Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,
    Bespake them thus, 'I thank you, countrymen.'
  DUCHESS. Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?
  YORK. As in a theatre the eyes of men
    After a well-grac'd actor leaves the stage
    The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted,
    But heaven hath a hand in these events,
    And lasting fealty to the new-made king.
  DUCHESS. Welcome, my son. Who are the violets now
    That strew the green lap of the new come spring?
    What news from Oxford? Do these justs and triumphs hold?
  AUMERLE. For aught I know, my lord, they do.
  YORK. You will be there, I know.
    Yea, look'st thou pale? Let me see the writing.
  YORK. No matter, then, who see it.
    I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.
    For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph-day.
    Boy, let me see the writing.
  DUCHESS. What is the matter, my lord?
  YORK. Ho! who is within there?
    I will appeach the villain.
  DUCHESS. What is the matter?
  DUCHESS. I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle?
  AUMERLE. Good mother, be content; it is no more
  YORK. Bring me my boots. I will unto the King.
    Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
    And rob me of a happy mother's name?
    Is he not like thee? Is he not thine own?
    A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament,
    And interchangeably set down their hands
    To kill the King at Oxford.
    He is as like thee as a man may be
  DUCHESS. After, Aumerle! Mount thee upon his horse;
    Spur post, and get before him to the King,
    And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.
    And never will I rise up from the ground
    Till Bolingbroke have pardon'd thee. Away, be gone.
Enter BOLINGBROKE as King, PERCY, and other LORDS
    Inquire at London, 'mongst the taverns there,
    For there, they say, he daily doth frequent
    Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes
    Takes on the point of honour to support
  PERCY. My lord, some two days since I saw the Prince,
  BOLINGBROKE. And what said the gallant?
  PERCY. His answer was, he would unto the stews,
    And from the common'st creature pluck a glove
    He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.
  AUMERLE. Where is the King?
    What is the matter with our cousin now?
  AUMERLE. For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
    If on the first, how heinous e'er it be,
    To win thy after-love I pardon thee.
  AUMERLE. Then give me leave that I may turn the key,
            [The DUKE OF YORK knocks at the door and crieth]
    Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there.
  BOLINGBROKE. [Drawing] Villain, I'll make thee safe.
  YORK. [Within] Open the door, secure, foolhardy King.
    Open the door, or I will break it open.
  BOLINGBROKE. What is the matter, uncle? Speak;
    I do repent me; read not my name there;
    I tore it from the traitor's bosom, King;
    A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.
    O loyal father of a treacherous son!
    As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.
    The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.
    Speak with me, pity me, open the door.
    And now chang'd to 'The Beggar and the King.'
    My dangerous cousin, let your mother in.
    This fest'red joint cut off, the rest rest sound;
    This let alone will all the rest confound.
    Love loving not itself, none other can.
  DUCHESS. Not yet, I thee beseech.
    And never see day that the happy sees
  AUMERLE. Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.
  YORK. Against them both, my true joints bended be.
    Our knees still kneel till to the ground they grow.
    Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have
    'Pardon' should be the first word of thy speech.
    Say 'pardon,' King; let pity teach thee how.
    That sets the word itself against the word!
    Thine eye begins to speak, set thy tongue there;
    Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.
    Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.
  BOLINGBROKE. But for our trusty brother-in-law and the Abbot,
    With all the rest of that consorted crew,
    Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.
    To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are.
    But I will have them, if I once know where.
    Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.
  DUCHESS. Come, my old son; I pray God make thee new.      Exeunt
  EXTON. Didst thou not mark the King, what words he spake?
    And urg'd it twice together, did he not?
    As who should say 'I would thou wert the man
    Meaning the King at Pomfret. Come, let's go.
    I am the King's friend, and will rid his foe.         Exeunt
Pomfret Castle. The dungeon of the Castle
    This prison where I live unto the world
    And, for because the world is populous
    My brain I'll prove the female to my soul,
    My soul the father; and these two beget
    And these same thoughts people this little world,
    In humours like the people of this world,
    With scruples, and do set the word itself
    Against the word,
    As thus: 'Come, little ones'; and then again,
    To thread the postern of a small needle's eye.'
    Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot
    Unlikely wonders: how these vain weak nails
    May tear a passage through the flinty ribs
    And, for they cannot, die in their own pride.
    Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves
    That they are not the first of fortune's slaves,
    Nor shall not be the last; like silly beggars
    Who, sitting in the stocks, refuge their shame,
    That many have and others must sit there;
    And in this thought they find a kind of ease,
    Bearing their own misfortunes on the back
    Of such as have before endur'd the like.
    So is it in the music of men's lives.
    And here have I the daintiness of ear
    But, for the concord of my state and time,
    My thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar
    Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch,
    Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.
    Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is
    Which is the bell. So sighs, and tears, and groans,
    While I stand fooling here, his Jack of the clock.
    For though it have holp madmen to their wits,
              Enter a GROOM of the stable
    What art thou? and how comest thou hither,
  GROOM. So proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.
    Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck
    Forgiveness, horse! Why do I rail on thee,
    Who lately came from the King, commands the contrary.
  KING RICHARD. The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!
                                           [Beats the KEEPER]
    Go thou and fill another room in hell.
              [He kills another, then EXTON strikes him down]
    Hath with the King's blood stain'd the King's own land.
    Both have I spill'd. O, would the deed were good!
    For now the devil, that told me I did well,
    This dead King to the living King I'll bear.
    Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.       Exeunt
Flourish. Enter BOLINGBROKE, the DUKE OF YORK, With other LORDS
  BOLINGBROKE. Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear
    Is that the rebels have consum'd with fire
    But whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.
    Welcome, my lord. What is the news?
    The manner of their taking may appear
  BOLINGBROKE. We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains;
    Two of the dangerous consorted traitors
         Enter PERCY, With the BISHOP OF CARLISLE
    Hath yielded up his body to the grave;
    High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.
    Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.
  BOLINGBROKE. Exton, I thank thee not; for thou hast wrought
    Nor do I thee. Though I did wish him dead,
    I hate the murderer, love him murdered.
    But neither my good word nor princely favour;
    I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land,
    Sons to the King
    Brothers to the King
  EARL RIVERS, brother to King Edward's Queen
  SIR ROBERT BRAKENBURY, Lieutenant of the Tower
  DUCHESS OF YORK, mother to King Edward IV
    Henry VI; afterwards married to the Duke of Gloucester
King Richard the Third
  GLOUCESTER. Now is the winter of our discontent
    And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house
    In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
    To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
    To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.
    That dogs bark at me as I halt by them-
    Have no delight to pass away the time,
    Unless to spy my shadow in the sun
    And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover
    To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
    And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
    To set my brother Clarence and the King
    In deadly hate the one against the other;
    Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be.
    Brother, good day. What means this armed guard
    He should, for that, commit your godfathers.
    That you should be new-christ'ned in the Tower.
    But what's the matter, Clarence? May I know?
    And from the cross-row plucks the letter G,
    These, as I learn, and such like toys as these
    'Tis not the King that sends you to the Tower;
    Antony Woodville, her brother there,
    That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,
  CLARENCE. By heaven, I think there is no man is secure
    But the Queen's kindred, and night-walking heralds
    That trudge betwixt the King and Mistress Shore.
    If we will keep in favour with the King,
    Since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen,
    Of what degree soever, with your brother.
    We speak no treason, man; we say the King
    And that the Queen's kindred are made gentlefolks.
  GLOUCESTER. Naught to do with Mistress Shore! I tell thee,
    Forbear your conference with the noble Duke.
  GLOUCESTER. We are the Queen's abjects and must obey.
    Brother, farewell; I will unto the King;
    Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood
  CLARENCE. I know it pleaseth neither of us well.
  GLOUCESTER. Go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return.
    Simple, plain Clarence, I do love thee so
    If heaven will take the present at our hands.
    Well are you welcome to the open air.
    But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks
    That were the cause of my imprisonment.
    For they that were your enemies are his,
  HASTINGS. More pity that the eagles should be mew'd
    Clarence hath not another day to live;
    And leave the world for me to bustle in!
    For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter.
    What though I kill'd her husband and her father?
    The readiest way to make the wench amends
    Is to become her husband and her father;
    As for another secret close intent
    Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns;
    When they are gone, then must I count my gains.         Exit
London. Another street
LADY ANNE being the mourner, attended by TRESSEL and BERKELEY
    Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster!
    To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,
    Stabb'd by the self-same hand that made these wounds.
    Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life
    I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.
    O, cursed be the hand that made these holes!
    Cursed the heart that had the heart to do it!
    Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence!
    That makes us wretched by the death of thee
    May fright the hopeful mother at the view,
    More miserable by the death of him
    Than I am made by my young lord and thee!
    Taken from Paul's to be interred there;
                                [The bearers take up the coffin]
  GLOUCESTER. Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.
  GLOUCESTER. Villains, set down the corse; or, by Saint Paul,
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. My lord, stand back, and let the coffin
    Or, by Saint Paul, I'll strike thee to my foot
    And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.
                               [The bearers set down the coffin]
    And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.
    His soul thou canst not have; therefore, be gone.
    For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell
    Open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh.
    Either, heav'n, with lightning strike the murd'rer dead;
  GLOUCESTER. But I know none, and therefore am no beast.
  ANNE. O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
    Of these supposed crimes to give me leave
    Of these known evils but to give me leave
  GLOUCESTER. Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have
  ANNE. Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make
    That didst unworthy slaughter upon others.
  GLOUCESTER. Say that I slew them not?
  ANNE. Then say they were not slain.
    But dead they are, and, devilish slave, by thee.
  ANNE. Why, then he is alive.
    But that thy brothers beat aside the point.
    That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.
  GLOUCESTER. The better for the King of Heaven, that hath
    thither,
  ANNE. Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!
    Is not the causer of the timeless deaths
    Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,
    As blameful as the executioner?
  ANNE. Thou wast the cause and most accurs'd effect.
  GLOUCESTER. Your beauty was the cause of that effect-
    To undertake the death of all the world
  ANNE. If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
    As all the world is cheered by the sun,
  ANNE. I would I were, to be reveng'd on thee.
    To be reveng'd on him that loveth thee.
  GLOUCESTER. He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband
    Did it to help thee to a better husband.
  ANNE. His better doth not breathe upon the earth.
  GLOUCESTER. He lives that loves thee better than he could.
  ANNE. Would they were basilisks to strike thee dead!
  GLOUCESTER. I would they were, that I might die at once;
    For now they kill me with a living death.
    Sham'd their aspects with store of childish drops-
    No, when my father York and Edward wept
    To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made
    Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,
    Told the sad story of my father's death,
    That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks
    And what these sorrows could not thence exhale
    Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.
    Lo here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword;
    And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,
    I lay it naked to the deadly stroke,
    And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
                                           [She falls the sword]
    Take up the sword again, or take up me.
    Speak it again, and even with the word
    To both their deaths shalt thou be accessary.
  GLOUCESTER. Say, then, my peace is made.
  ANNE. To take is not to give.               [Puts on the ring]
    Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
  GLOUCESTER. That it may please you leave these sad designs
  GLOUCESTER. Sirs, take up the corse.
  GLOUCESTER. No, to White Friars; there attend my coming.
    What! I that kill'd her husband and his father-
    Having God, her conscience, and these bars against me,
    But the plain devil and dissembling looks,
    And yet to win her, all the world to nothing!
    Fram'd in the prodigality of nature,
    That cropp'd the golden prime of this sweet prince
    And then return lamenting to my love.
  RIVERS. Have patience, madam; there's no doubt his Majesty
  GREY. No other harm but loss of such a lord.
    Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,
    But so it must be, if the King miscarry.
  GREY. Here come the Lords of Buckingham and Derby.
  DERBY. I do beseech you, either not believe
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Saw you the King to-day, my Lord of
  DERBY. But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
    Between the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers,
    And between them and my Lord Chamberlain;
    And sent to warn them to his royal presence.
    I fear our happiness is at the height.
    Who is it that complains unto the King
    That I, forsooth, am stern and love them not?
    By holy Paul, they love his Grace but lightly
  GLOUCESTER. To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.
    When have I injur'd thee? when done thee wrong,
    Or thee, or thee, or any of your faction?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the
    Against my children, brothers, and myself-
    Makes him to send that he may learn the ground.
  GLOUCESTER. I cannot tell; the world is grown so bad
    brother Gloucester:
    Our brother is imprison'd by your means,
    Myself disgrac'd, and the nobility
    Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been
    Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
  GLOUCESTER. You may deny that you were not the mean
    And then deny her aiding hand therein,
    I had rather be a country servant-maid
  GLOUCESTER. What! Threat you me with telling of the
    I will avouch't in presence of the King.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Out, devil! I do remember them to
    Thou kill'dst my husband Henry in the Tower,
    Were factious for the house of Lancaster;
  GLOUCESTER. Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick,
  GLOUCESTER. To fight on Edward's party for the crown;
  QUEEN MARGARET. Hie thee to hell for shame and leave this
    Thou cacodemon; there thy kingdom is.
    We follow'd then our lord, our sovereign king.
  GLOUCESTER. If I should be! I had rather be a pedlar.
    Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof!
    That I enjoy, being the Queen thereof.
  QUEEN MARGARET. As little joy enjoys the Queen thereof;
    For I am she, and altogether joyless.
    That will I make before I let thee go.
    And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.
  GLOUCESTER. The curse my noble father laid on thee,
    And then to dry them gav'st the Duke a clout
    Steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland-
    His curses then from bitterness of soul
    Denounc'd against thee are all fall'n upon thee;
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. So just is God to right the innocent.
  HASTINGS. O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,
    And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!
  RIVERS. Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
  BUCKINGHAM. Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.
    Ready to catch each other by the throat,
    Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
    Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!
    And see another, as I see thee now,
    Die neither mother, wife, nor England's Queen!
  GLOUCESTER. Have done thy charm, thou hateful wither'd
  QUEEN MARGARET. And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou
    Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
    O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,
    And then hurl down their indignation
    On thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace!
    Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils!
    The slave of nature and the son of hell,
    Thou slander of thy heavy mother's womb,
    Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins,
  QUEEN MARGARET. I call thee not.
  GLOUCESTER. I cry thee mercy then, for I did think
    That thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names.
    O, let me make the period to my curse!
    Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?
    To help thee curse this poisonous bunch-back'd toad.
    They that stand high have many blasts to shake them,
    And if they fall they dash themselves to pieces.
    Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top,
    And dallies with the wind, and scorns the sun.
  QUEEN MARGARET. And turns the sun to shade-alas! alas!
    Witness my son, now in the shade of death,
  QUEEN MARGARET. Urge neither charity nor shame to me.
    In sign of league and amity with thee.
    Now fair befall thee and thy noble house!
    Nor thou within the compass of my curse.
    The lips of those that breathe them in the air.
  QUEEN MARGARET. I will not think but they ascend the sky
    And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace.
    His venom tooth will rankle to the death:
    Sin, death, and hell, have set their marks on him,
    And all their ministers attend on him.
    And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?
    O, but remember this another day,
    Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
  GLOUCESTER. I cannot blame her; by God's holy Mother,
    My part thereof that I have done to her.
  GLOUCESTER. Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong.
    God pardon them that are the cause thereof!
    To pray for them that have done scathe to us!
  GLOUCESTER. I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.
    I lay unto the grievous charge of others.
    And tell them 'tis the Queen and her allies
    That stir the King against the Duke my brother.
    Now they believe it, and withal whet me
    But then I sigh and, with a piece of Scripture,
    Tell them that God bids us do good for evil.
    And thus I clothe my naked villainy
    And seem a saint when most I play the devil.
  FIRST MURDERER. We are, my lord, and come to have the
                                             [Gives the warrant]
    But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,
    I would not spend another such a night
    So full of dismal terror was the time!
  CLARENCE. Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower
    And in my company my brother Gloucester,
    Upon the hatches. Thence we look'd toward England,
    During the wars of York and Lancaster,
    Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
    Into the tumbling billows of the main.
    All scatt'red in the bottom of the sea;
    Some lay in dead men's skulls, and in the holes
    Where eyes did once inhabit there were crept,
    That woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep
    And mock'd the dead bones that lay scatt'red by.
  KEEPER. Had you such leisure in the time of death
    To gaze upon these secrets of the deep?
    To yield the ghost, but still the envious flood
    To find the empty, vast, and wand'ring air;
    But smother'd it within my panting bulk,
    Who almost burst to belch it in the sea.
  CLARENCE. No, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life.
    O, then began the tempest to my soul!
    I pass'd, methought, the melancholy flood
    Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
    The first that there did greet my stranger soul
    Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick,
    That stabb'd me in the field by Tewksbury.
    Such hideous cries that, with the very noise,
  CLARENCE. Ah, Keeper, Keeper, I have done these things
  KEEPER, I prithee sit by me awhile;
                  Enter BRAKENBURY the Lieutenant
    Makes the night morning and the noontide night.
    Princes have but their titles for their glories,
    So that between their tides and low name
    There's nothing differs but the outward fame.
                      Enter the two MURDERERS
    thou hither?
    hither on my legs.
    Because I will be guiltless from the meaning.
    There lies the Duke asleep; and there the keys.
    I'll to the King and signify to him
  SECOND MURDERER. Why, he shall never wake until the great
  FIRST MURDERER. Why, then he'll say we stabb'd him
    be damn'd for killing him, from the which no warrant can
  FIRST MURDERER. I'll back to the Duke of Gloucester and
  SECOND MURDERER. Nay, I prithee, stay a little. I hope this
  FIRST MURDERER. Remember our reward, when the deed's
  SECOND MURDERER. Zounds, he dies; I had forgot the reward.
  SECOND MURDERER. O, in the Duke of Gloucester's purse!
  SECOND MURDERER. 'Tis no matter; let it go; there's few or
  FIRST MURDERER. What if it come to thee again?
    persuading me not to kill the Duke.
  SECOND MURDERER. Take the devil in thy mind and believe
    him not; he would insinuate with thee but to make the
  FIRST MURDERER. Take him on the costard with the hilts of
    thy sword, and then chop him in the malmsey-butt in the
  FIRST MURDERER. My voice is now the King's, my looks
    Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
  CLARENCE. You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,
    And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
  FIRST MURDERER. Offended us you have not, but the King.
  SECOND MURDERER. Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die.
    To slay the innocent? What is my offence?
    Where is the evidence that doth accuse me?
    What lawful quest have given their verdict up
    Unto the frowning judge, or who pronounc'd
  CLARENCE. Erroneous vassals! the great King of kings
    Hath in the tables of his law commanded
    That thou shalt do no murder. Will you then
    To hurl upon their heads that break his law.
    on thee
    Thou didst receive the sacrament to fight
    In quarrel of the house of Lancaster.
  FIRST MURDERER. And like a traitor to the name of God
    Unripp'dst the bowels of thy sov'reign's son.
    For Edward, for my brother, for his sake.
    If God will be avenged for the deed,
    Take not the quarrel from His pow'rful arm;
  FIRST MURDERER. Who made thee then a bloody minister
    That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?
  CLARENCE. My brother's love, the devil, and my rage.
  FIRST MURDERER. Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy
    Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
  CLARENCE. If you do love my brother, hate not me;
    I am his brother, and I love him well.
    And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,
  SECOND MURDERER. You are deceiv'd: your brother Gloucester
  CLARENCE. Tell him when that our princely father York
    And charg'd us from his soul to love each other,
    From this earth's thraldom to the joys of heaven.
    O, sirs, consider: they that set you on
    To do this deed will hate you for the deed.
    I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.
                                              Exit with the body
    By heavens, the Duke shall know how slack you have
    brother!
    Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say;
    For I repent me that the Duke is slain.                 Exit
    Well, I'll go hide the body in some hole,
    Till that the Duke give order for his burial;
    For this will out, and then I must not stay.            Exit
HASTINGS, BUCKINGHAM, GREY, and others
    Hastings and Rivers, take each other's hand;
  HASTINGS. So thrive I, as I truly swear the like!
    Lest He that is the supreme King of kings
    Either of you to be the other's end.
    You have been factious one against the other.
  BUCKINGHAM.  [To the QUEEN]  Whenever Buckingham
    There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here
    To make the blessed period of this peace.
    Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliff and the Duke.
  KING EDWARD. Happy, indeed, as we have spent the day.
    Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers.
    More than the infant that is born to-night.
    To take our brother Clarence to your grace.
    Who knows not that the gentle Duke is dead?
  BUCKINGHAM. Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?
  DORSET. Ay, my good lord; and no man in the presence
    Some tardy cripple bare the countermand
  KING EDWARD. I prithee, peace; my soul is full of sorrow.
    Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.
  KING EDWARD. Have I a tongue to doom my brother's death,
    My brother killed no man-his fault was thought,
    Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love?
    Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
    Who told me, in the field at Tewksbury
    And said 'Dear Brother, live, and be a king'?
    Who told me, when we both lay in the field
    All thin and naked, to the numb cold night?
    But for my brother not a man would speak;
  GLOUCESTER. This is the fruits of rashness. Mark'd you not
    How that the guilty kindred of the Queen
    Look'd pale when they did hear of Clarence' death?
    O, they did urge it still unto the King!
Enter the old DUCHESS OF YORK, with the SON and DAUGHTER of CLARENCE
  SON. Good grandam, tell us, is our father dead?
    If that our noble father were alive?
    I do lament the sickness of the King,
    As loath to lose him, not your father's death;
    You cannot guess who caus'd your father's death.
    Told me the King, provok'd to it by the Queen,
    Bade me rely on him as on my father,
    He is my son; ay, and therein my shame;
    Why grow the branches when the root is gone?
    Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?
    That our swift-winged souls may catch the King's,
    Thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother
    And hast the comfort of thy children left;
  SON. Ah, aunt, you wept not for our father's death!
  DAUGHTER. Our fatherless distress was left unmoan'd;
    All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes
    That I, being govern'd by the watery moon,
    May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world!
  CHILDREN. Ah for our father, for our dear Lord Clarence!
  DUCHESS. What stays had I but they? and they are gone.
  DUCHESS. Was never mother had so dear a loss.
    Alas, I am the mother of these griefs!
    I for an Edward weep, so do not they.
  DORSET. Comfort, dear mother. God is much displeas'd
    For it requires the royal debt it lent you.
  RIVERS. Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
    Of the young prince your son. Send straight for him;
    To wail the dimming of our shining star;
    But none can help our harms by wailing them.
    Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy;
  DUCHESS. God bless thee; and put meekness in thy breast,
    That is the butt end of a mother's blessing;
    Now cheer each other in each other's love.
    We are to reap the harvest of his son.
    But lately splinter'd, knit, and join'd together,
    Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fet
    Hither to London, to be crown'd our King.
    Which would be so much the more dangerous
    By how much the estate is green and yet ungovern'd;
    As well the fear of harm as harm apparent,
  GLOUCESTER. I hope the King made peace with all of us;
    And the compact is firm and true in me.
    That it is meet so few should fetch the Prince.
    Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.
  BUCKINGHAM. My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince,
    For by the way I'll sort occasion,
    As index to the story we late talk'd of,
    To part the Queen's proud kindred from the Prince.
  GLOUCESTER. My other self, my counsel's consistory,
    Toward Ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind.        Exeunt
Enter one CITIZEN at one door, and another at the other
  FIRST CITIZEN. Good morrow, neighbour. Whither away so
    Hear you the news abroad?
  FIRST CITIZEN. Yes, that the King is dead.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Ill news, by'r lady; seldom comes the
                        Enter another CITIZEN
  THIRD CITIZEN. Doth the news hold of good King Edward's
  SECOND CITIZEN. Ay, sir, it is too true; God help the while!
  SECOND CITIZEN. In him there is a hope of government,
    No doubt, shall then, and till then, govern well.
  FIRST CITIZEN. So stood the state when Henry the Sixth
  THIRD CITIZEN. Stood the state so? No, no, good friends,
    For then this land was famously enrich'd
    With politic grave counsel; then the King
  FIRST CITIZEN. Why, so hath this, both by his father and
    mother.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Better it were they all came by his father,
    Or by his father there were none at all;
    O, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester!
    And the Queen's sons and brothers haught and proud;
    And were they to be rul'd, and not to rule,
  FIRST CITIZEN. Come, come, we fear the worst; all will be
    their cloaks;
    When great leaves fall, then winter is at hand;
    When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
  SECOND CITIZEN. Truly, the hearts of men are fun of fear.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Before the days of change, still is it so;
    But leave it all to God. Whither away?
  SECOND CITIZEN. Marry, we were sent for to the justices.
Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK, the young DUKE OF YORK, QUEEN ELIZABETH,
and the DUCHESS OF YORK
  ARCHBISHOP. Last night, I hear, they lay at Stony Stratford,
    And at Northampton they do rest to-night;
    To-morrow or next day they will be here.
  DUCHESS. I long with all my heart to see the Prince.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. But I hear no; they say my son of York
  YORK. Ay, mother; but I would not have it so.
    More than my brother. 'Ay,' quoth my uncle Gloucester
  DUCHESS. Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
    In him that did object the same to thee.
    He was the wretched'st thing when he was young,
  DUCHESS. I hope he is; but yet let mothers doubt.
  DUCHESS. How, my young York? I prithee let me hear it.
  YORK. Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast
  DUCHESS. I prithee, pretty York, who told thee this?
  ARCHBISHOP. Good madam, be not angry with the child.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. How doth the Prince?
    Are sent to Pomfret, and with them
  DUCHESS. Who hath committed them?
    Why or for what the nobles were committed
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Ay me, I see the ruin of my house!
    The tiger now hath seiz'd the gentle hind;
    Upon the innocent and aweless throne.
    I see, as in a map, the end of all.
    My husband lost his life to get the crown;
    For me to joy and weep their gain and loss;
    Clean over-blown, themselves the conquerors
    Make war upon themselves-brother to brother,
  ARCHBISHOP.  [To the QUEEN]  My gracious lady, go.
    And thither bear your treasure and your goods.
    Go, I'll conduct you to the sanctuary.                Exeunt
The trumpets sound. Enter the PRINCE OF WALES, GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM,
CATESBY, CARDINAL BOURCHIER, and others
  PRINCE. No, uncle; but our crosses on the way
  GLOUCESTER. Sweet Prince, the untainted virtue of your
    Hath not yet div'd into the world's deceit;
    Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.
    Your Grace attended to their sug'red words
    But look'd not on the poison of their hearts.
    God keep you from them and from such false friends!
  PRINCE. God keep me from false friends! but they were
  GLOUCESTER. My lord, the Mayor of London comes to greet
                Enter the LORD MAYOR and his train
    I thought my mother and my brother York
    Would long ere this have met us on the way.
    To tell us whether they will come or no!
  BUCKINGHAM. And, in good time, here comes the sweating
  PRINCE. Welcome, my lord. What, will our mother come?
    The Queen your mother and your brother York
    But by his mother was perforce withheld.
    Persuade the Queen to send the Duke of York
    Unto his princely brother presently?
    Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
    We should infringe the holy privilege
    Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,
    The benefit thereof is always granted
    To those whose dealings have deserv'd the place
    And those who have the wit to claim the place.
    This Prince hath neither claim'd it nor deserv'd it,
    And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it.
    Then, taking him from thence that is not there,
    You break no privilege nor charter there.
  PRINCE. Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
    Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
    Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower,
  PRINCE. I do not like the Tower, of any place.
    Methinks the truth should Eve from age to age,
    Even to the general all-ending day.
  GLOUCESTER.  [Aside]  So wise so young, they say, do never
    [Aside]  Thus, like the formal vice, Iniquity,
              Enter HASTINGS, young YORK, and the CARDINAL
  BUCKINGHAM. Now, in good time, here comes the Duke of
  PRINCE. Richard of York, how fares our loving brother?
  PRINCE. Ay brother, to our grief, as it is yours.
    The Prince my brother hath outgrown me far.
  YORK. And therefore is he idle?
  PRINCE. A beggar, brother?
  YORK. A greater gift! O, that's the sword to it!
  YORK. O, then, I see you will part but with light gifts:
    Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me;
    To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle
    Will to your mother, to entreat of her
    To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.
  YORK. What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?
  YORK. I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.
    My grandam told me he was murder'd there.
  PRINCE. An if they live, I hope I need not fear.
    Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.
    Was not incensed by his subtle mother
    He is all the mother's, from the top to toe.
  BUCKINGHAM. Well, let them rest. Come hither, Catesby.
    Thou know'st our reasons urg'd upon the way.
    For the instalment of this noble Duke
    In the seat royal of this famous isle?
  CATESBY. He for his father's sake so loves the Prince
  BUCKINGHAM. What think'st thou then of Stanley? Will
  BUCKINGHAM. Well then, no more but this: go, gentle
    And summon him to-morrow to the Tower,
    To sit about the coronation.
    Be thou so too, and so break off the talk,
    Give Mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.
  CATESBY. My good lords both, with all the heed I can.
  GLOUCESTER. At Crosby House, there shall you find us both.
    The earldom of Hereford and all the movables
    Whereof the King my brother was possess'd.
Enter a MESSENGER to the door of HASTINGS
  MESSENGER. One from the Lord Stanley.
  MESSENGER. Upon the stroke of four.
  HASTINGS. Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious
  HASTINGS. What then?
    He dreamt the boar had razed off his helm.
    Besides, he says there are two councils kept,
    And that may be determin'd at the one
    Which may make you and him to rue at th' other.
    And with all speed post with him toward the north
    To shun the danger that his soul divines.
    Bid him not fear the separated council:
    His honour and myself are at the one,
    And at the other is my good friend Catesby;
    To trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers.
    To fly the boar before the boar pursues
    Were to incense the boar to follow us
    And we will both together to the Tower,
    Where, he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.
    Till Richard wear the garland of the realm.
  HASTINGS. How, wear the garland! Dost thou mean the
    Before I'll see the crown so foul misplac'd.
    Upon his party for the gain thereof;
    And thereupon he sends you this good news,
    The kindred of the Queen, must die at Pomfret.
    Because they have been still my adversaries;
    God knows I will not do it to the death.
    That they which brought me in my master's hate,
    I live to look upon their tragedy.
    With some men else that think themselves as safe
    [Aside]  For they account his head upon the bridge.
  HASTINGS. I know they do, and I have well deserv'd it.
    Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?
    You may jest on, but, by the holy rood,
    I do not like these several councils, I.
  STANLEY. The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from
    Were jocund and suppos'd their states were sure,
    And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;
    But yet you see how soon the day o'ercast.
    What, shall we toward the Tower? The day is spent.
    To-day the lords you talk'd of are beheaded.
  STANLEY. They, for their truth, might better wear their
    Than some that have accus'd them wear their hats.
    How now, Hastings! How goes the world with thee?
  HASTINGS. I tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now
    Then was I going prisoner to the Tower
    By the suggestion of the Queen's allies;
    But now, I tell thee-keep it to thyself-
  HASTINGS. Gramercy, Hastings; there, drink that for me.
  HASTINGS. I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.
    Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.
    Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest:
    What, go you toward the Tower?
  BUCKINGHAM. I do, my lord, but long I cannot stay there;
    I shall return before your lordship thence.
  HASTINGS. Nay, like enough, for I stay dinner there.
Enter SIR RICHARD RATCLIFF, with halberds, carrying the Nobles,
  RIVERS. Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this:
  GREY. God bless the Prince from all the pack of you!
  RATCLIFF. Dispatch; the limit of your lives is out.
    Within the guilty closure of thy walls
  RICHARD the Second here was hack'd to death;
    We give to thee our guiltless blood to drink.
  RIVERS. Then curs'd she Richard, then curs'd she
    To hear her prayer for them, as now for us!
  RATCLIFF. Make haste; the hour of death is expiate.
Enter BUCKINGHAM, DERBY, HASTINGS, the BISHOP of ELY, RATCLIFF, LOVEL,
with others and seat themselves at a table
  HASTINGS. Now, noble peers, the cause why we are met
    Is to determine of the coronation.
    In God's name speak-when is the royal day?
  BUCKINGHAM. Is all things ready for the royal time?
  BISHOP OF ELY. To-morrow then I judge a happy day.
  BUCKINGHAM. Who knows the Lord Protector's mind
    Who is most inward with the noble Duke?
  BUCKINGHAM. We know each other's faces; for our hearts,
    But for his purpose in the coronation
    His gracious pleasure any way therein.
    But you, my honourable lords, may name the time;
    And in the Duke's behalf I'll give my voice,
  BISHOP OF ELY. In happy time, here comes the Duke himself.
    I mean, your voice for crowning of the King.
    I saw good strawberries in your garden there.
    I do beseech you send for some of them.
    And finds the testy gentleman so hot
    Shall lose the royalty of England's throne.
    As else I would be, were the day prolong'd.
                    Re-enter the BISHOP OF ELY
  BISHOP OF ELY. Where is my lord the Duke of Gloucester?
    I have sent for these strawberries.
    There's some conceit or other likes him well
    I think there's never a man in Christendom
  GLOUCESTER. I pray you all, tell me what they deserve
    Upon my body with their hellish charms?
    To doom th' offenders, whosoe'er they be.
    I say, my lord, they have deserved death.
  GLOUCESTER. Then be your eyes the witness of their evil.
    Is like a blasted sapling wither'd up.
    That by their witchcraft thus have marked me.
  HASTINGS. If they have done this deed, my noble lord-
    I will not dine until I see the same.
  STANLEY did dream the boar did raze our helms,
    And started when he look'd upon the Tower,
    As loath to bear me to the slaughter-house.
    O, now I need the priest that spake to me!
    I now repent I told the pursuivant,
  RATCLIFF. Come, come, dispatch; the Duke would be at
    Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
    Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
    I prophesy the fearfull'st time to thee
    Come, lead me to the block; bear him my head.
    And then again begin, and stop again,
  BUCKINGHAM. Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian;
    And both are ready in their offices
  GLOUCESTER. He is; and, see, he brings the mayor along.
                 Enter the LORD MAYOR and CATESBY
  GLOUCESTER. Look to the drawbridge there!
  GLOUCESTER. Catesby, o'erlook the walls.
  BUCKINGHAM. Lord Mayor, the reason we have sent-
  GLOUCESTER. Look back, defend thee; here are enemies.
  GLOUCESTER. Be patient; they are friends-Ratcliff and Lovel.
  LOVEL. Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
  GLOUCESTER. So dear I lov'd the man that I must weep.
    I took him for the plainest harmless creature
    That breath'd upon the earth a Christian;
  BUCKINGHAM. Well, well, he was the covert'st shelt'red
    We live to tell it-that the subtle traitor
    This day had plotted, in the council-house,
    Or that we would, against the form of law,
    Proceed thus rashly in the villain's death
    But that the extreme peril of the case,
    To warn false traitors from the like attempts.
    Which now the loving haste of these our friends,
    The manner and the purpose of his treasons:
    That you might well have signified the same
    Unto the citizens, who haply may
    T' avoid the the the censures of the carping world.
    There, at your meet'st advantage of the time,
    Infer the bastardy of Edward's children.
    Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen
    Heir to the crown-meaning indeed his house,
    Which by the sign thereof was termed so.
    Which stretch'd unto their servants, daughters, wives,
    Tell them, when that my mother went with child
    My princely father then had wars in France
    And, by true computation of the time,
    Found that the issue was not his begot;
    Being nothing like the noble Duke my father.
    Because, my lord, you know my mother lives.
  BUCKINGHAM. Doubt not, my lord, I'll play the orator
    As if the golden fee for which I plead
  GLOUCESTER. If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard's
    With reverend fathers and well learned bishops.
    Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.           Exit
    [To CATESBY]  Go thou to Friar Penker. Bid them both
    To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight,
    Have any time recourse unto the Princes.                Exit
  SCRIVENER. Here is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings;
    And mark how well the sequel hangs together:
    And yet within these five hours Hastings liv'd,
    Here's a good world the while! Who is so gros
    Bad is the world; and all will come to nought,
  GLOUCESTER. How now, how now! What say the citizens?
  BUCKINGHAM. Now, by the holy Mother of our Lord,
  GLOUCESTER. Touch'd you the bastardy of Edward's
    And his enforcement of the city wives;
    As being got, your father then in France,
    And his resemblance, being not like the Duke.
    Being the right idea of your father,
    I bid them that did love their country's good
  GLOUCESTER. And did they so?
  BUCKINGHAM. No, so God help me, they spake not a word;
    Star'd each on other, and look'd deadly pale.
    Which when I saw, I reprehended them,
    And ask'd the Mayor what meant this wilfull silence.
    His answer was, the people were not used
    To be spoke to but by the Recorder.
    'Thus saith the Duke, thus hath the Duke inferr'd'-
    At lower end of the hall hurl'd up their caps,
    And thus I took the vantage of those few-
  GLOUCESTER. What, tongueless blocks were they? Would
    they not speak?
    Will not the Mayor then and his brethren come?
    Play the maid's part: still answer nay, and take it.
  GLOUCESTER. I go; and if you plead as well for them
    As I can say nay to thee for myself,
  BUCKINGHAM. Go, go, up to the leads; the Lord Mayor
           Enter the LORD MAYOR, ALDERMEN, and citizens
    I think the Duke will not be spoke withal.
    He is within, with two right reverend fathers,
  BUCKINGHAM. Return, good Catesby, to the gracious Duke;
    Tell him, myself, the Mayor and Aldermen,
    Take on his Grace the sovereignty thereof;
    His Grace not being warn'd thereof before,
    Are at their beads, 'tis much to draw them thence,
    To stay him from the fall of vanity;
    And pardon us the interruption
  GLOUCESTER. My lord, there needs no such apology:
    Who, earnest in the service of my God,
    Deferr'd the visitation of my friends.
    That seems disgracious in the city's eye,
  GLOUCESTER. Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?
  BUCKINGHAM. Know then, it is your fault that you resign
    The supreme seat, the throne majestical,
    To the corruption of a blemish'd stock;
    Whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,
    And almost should'red in the swallowing gulf
    Your gracious self to take on you the charge
    Or lowly factor for another's gain;
    For this, consorted with the citizens,
    And by their vehement instigation,
    To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,
    Then, on the other side, I check'd my friends.
    Therefore-to speak, and to avoid the first,
    And then, in speaking, not to incur the last-
    And that my path were even to the crown,
    As the ripe revenue and due of birth,
    That I would rather hide me from my greatness-
    And in the vapour of my glory smother'd.
    But, God be thank'd, there is no need of me-
    And much I need to help you, were there need.
    Which, mellow'd by the stealing hours of time,
    Will well become the seat of majesty
    But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,
    You say that Edward is your brother's son.
    Your mother lives a witness to his vow-
    To Bona, sister to the King of France.
    A care-craz'd mother to a many sons,
    Even in the afternoon of her best days,
    Seduc'd the pitch and height of his degree
    This Edward, whom our manners call the Prince.
    If not to bless us and the land withal,
    From the corruption of abusing times
  CATESBY. O, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit!
    Loath to depose the child, your brother's son;
    Your brother's son shall never reign our king;
    But we will plant some other in the throne
    To the disgrace and downfall of your house;
  CATESBY. Call him again, sweet Prince, accept their suit.
    If you deny them, all the land will rue it.
    Call them again. I am not made of stones,
                  Re-enter BUCKINGHAM and the rest
    I must have patience to endure the load;
    Attend the sequel of your imposition,
    From all the impure blots and stains thereof;
    How far I am from the desire of this.
  GLOUCESTER. In saying so, you shall but say the truth.
  BUCKINGHAM. To-morrow, then, we will attend your Grace;
  GLOUCESTER.  [To the BISHOPS]  Come, let us to our holy
London. Before the Tower
CLARENCE's young daughter, at another door
    Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester?
    Now, for my life, she's wand'ring to the Tower,
    On pure heart's love, to greet the tender Princes.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. As much to you, good sister! Whither
  ANNE. No farther than the Tower; and, as I guess,
    Upon the like devotion as yourselves,
    To gratulate the gentle Princes there.
    all together.
    And in good time, here the lieutenant comes.
    How doth the Prince, and my young son of York?
    I may not suffer you to visit them.
    The King hath strictly charg'd the contrary.
  BRAKENBURY. I mean the Lord Protector.
    Hath he set bounds between their love and me?
    I am their mother; who shall bar me from them?
  DUCHESS. I am their father's mother; I will see them.
  ANNE. Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother.
    Then bring me to their sights; I'll bear thy blame,
    And take thy office from thee on my peril.
    I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.            Exit
    And I'll salute your Grace of York as mother
  DORSET. Be of good cheer; mother, how fares your Grace?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee
    Death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels;
    Thy mother's name is ominous to children.
    If thou wilt outstrip death, go cross the seas,
    And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell.
    Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter-house,
    Lest thou increase the number of the dead,
    And make me die the thrall of Margaret's curse,
    Nor mother, wife, nor England's counted queen.
    Take all the swift advantage of the hours;
    In your behalf, to meet you on the way.
    O my accursed womb, the bed of death!
    A cockatrice hast thou hatch'd to the world,
    O, would to God that the inclusive verge
    Were red-hot steel, to sear me to the brains!
    And die ere men can say 'God save the Queen!'
    When scarce the blood was well wash'd from his hands
    Which issued from my other angel husband,
    And that dear saint which then I weeping follow'd-
    More miserable by the life of thee
    And prov'd the subject of mine own soul's curse,
    Which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest;
    Did I enjoy the golden dew of sleep,
    Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick;
    fortune guide thee!
    thee!  [To QUEEN ELIZABETH]  Go thou to sanctuary, and good
    thoughts possess thee!
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Stay, yet look back with me unto the
RATCLIFF, LOVEL, a PAGE, and others
                           [Here he ascendeth the throne. Sound]
    But shall we wear these glories for a day;
    Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?
  BUCKINGHAM. Still live they, and for ever let them last!
  KING RICHARD. Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch,
    Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead.
    Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?
  CATESBY.  [Aside to another]  The King is angry; see, he
                                      [Descends from the throne]
  KING RICHARD. I partly know the man. Go, call him hither,
    No more shall be the neighbour to my counsels.
    How now, Lord Stanley! What's the news?
    To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.    [Stands apart]
  KING RICHARD. Come hither, Catesby. Rumour it abroad
    I must be married to my brother's daughter,
    Murder her brothers, and then marry her!
    But I had rather kill two enemies.
  KING RICHARD. Why, then thou hast it. Two deep enemies,
    Are they that I would have thee deal upon.
  TYRREL, I mean those bastards in the Tower.
  TYRREL. Let me have open means to come to them,
    And soon I'll rid you from the fear of them.
    hither, Tyrrel.
    And I will love thee and prefer thee for it.
  BUCKINGHAM. I hear the news, my lord.
  BUCKINGHAM. My lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise,
    Th' earldom of Hereford and the movables
  KING RICHARD. I do remember me: Henry the Sixth
  KING RICHARD. How chance the prophet could not at that
  BUCKINGHAM. My lord, your promise for the earldom-
    The mayor in courtesy show'd me the castle
  BUCKINGHAM. Upon the stroke of ten.
  KING RICHARD. Because that like a Jack thou keep'st the
    I am not in the giving vein to-day.
  KING RICHARD. Thou troublest me; I am not in the vein.
    Albeit they were flesh'd villains, bloody dogs,
    Wept like two children in their deaths' sad story.
    'O, thus' quoth Dighton 'lay the gentle babes'-
    'Thus, thus,' quoth Forrest 'girdling one another
    Within their alabaster innocent arms.
    And in their summer beauty kiss'd each other.
    A book of prayers on their pillow lay;
    But, O, the devil'-there the villain stopp'd;
    When Dighton thus told on: 'We smothered
    That from the prime creation e'er she framed.'
    They could not speak; and so I left them both,
    To bear this tidings to the bloody King.
  TYRREL. If to have done the thing you gave in charge
    Beget your happiness, be happy then,
  KING RICHARD. But didst thou see them dead?
  TYRREL. The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them;
    But where, to say the truth, I do not know.
    When thou shalt tell the process of their death.
    Meantime, but think how I may do thee good
    Farewell till then.
    Now, for I know the Britaine Richmond aims
    At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter,
    And by that knot looks proudly on the crown,
    And Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen,
    Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
    We must be brief when traitors brave the field.       Exeunt
London. Before the palace
    And drop into the rotten mouth of death.
    Here in these confines slily have I lurk'd
    To watch the waning of mine enemies.
    And will to France, hoping the consequence
    Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret. Who comes here?
           Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH and the DUCHESS OF YORK
    If yet your gentle souls fly in the air
    And hear your mother's lamentation.
    And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
    Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.
    Give mine the benefit of seniory,
    And let my griefs frown on the upper hand.
    If sorrow can admit society,        [Sitting down with them]
    From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept
    To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood,
    That excellent grand tyrant of the earth
    How do I thank thee that this carnal cur
    Preys on the issue of his mother's body
    And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!
    The other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;
    Young York he is but boot, because both they
    Match'd not the high perfection of my loss.
    And the beholders of this frantic play,
    Untimely smother'd in their dusky graves.
    Only reserv'd their factor to buy souls
    And send them thither. But at hand, at hand,
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. O, thou didst prophesy the time would
    That I should wish for thee to help me curse
  QUEEN MARGARET. I Call'd thee then vain flourish of my
    I call'd thee then poor shadow, painted queen,
    A mother only mock'd with two fair babes,
    To be the aim of every dangerous shot,
    A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.
    Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers?
    Who sues, and kneels, and says 'God save the Queen'?
    Where be the bending peers that flattered thee?
    Where be the thronging troops that followed thee?
    For joyful mother, one that wails the name;
    Thus hath the course of justice whirl'd about
    And left thee but a very prey to time,
    To torture thee the more, being what thou art.
    Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
    And leave the burden of it all on thee.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the
    Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were,
    And he that slew them fouler than he is.
    Bett'ring thy loss makes the bad-causer worse;
    Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. My words are dull; O, quicken them
  QUEEN MARGARET. Thy woes will make them sharp and
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Windy attorneys to their client woes,
    Let them have scope; though what they will impart
    Help nothing else, yet do they case the heart.
  DUCHESS. If so, then be not tongue-tied. Go with me,
    And in the breath of bitter words let's smother
    My damned son that thy two sweet sons smother'd.
  DUCHESS. O, she that might have intercepted thee,
    By strangling thee in her accursed womb,
    From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done!
    The slaughter of the Prince that ow'd that crown,
    And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers?
  DUCHESS. Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Where is the gentle Rivers, Vaughan,
    Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women
    Rail on the Lord's anointed. Strike, I say!
    Either be patient and entreat me fair,
    Or with the clamorous report of war
  KING RICHARD. Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.
    That cannot brook the accent of reproof.
  KING RICHARD. Do, then; but I'll not hear.
  KING RICHARD. And brief, good mother; for I am in haste.
  DUCHESS. Art thou so hasty? I have stay'd for thee,
  DUCHESS. No, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well
    Thou cam'st on earth to make the earth my hell.
    Strike up the drum.
  DUCHESS. I prithee hear me speak.
    For I shall never speak to thee again.
  DUCHESS. Either thou wilt die by God's just ordinance
    Therefore take with thee my most grievous curse,
    Which in the day of battle tire thee more
    Than all the complete armour that thou wear'st!
    My prayers on the adverse party fight;
    And there the little souls of Edward's children
    Whisper the spirits of thine enemies
    And promise them success and victory.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. I have no moe sons of the royal blood
    For thee to slaughter. For my daughters, Richard,
    And therefore level not to hit their lives.
    Throw over her the veil of infamy;
      brothers.
  KING RICHARD. Lo, at their birth good stars were opposite.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. No, to their lives ill friends were
  KING RICHARD. All unavoided is the doom of destiny.
    If grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Cousins, indeed; and by their uncle
    Whose hand soever lanc'd their tender hearts,
    No doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt
    To revel in the entrails of my lambs.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. What good is cover'd with the face of
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Up to some scaffold, there to lose their
  KING RICHARD. Unto the dignity and height of Fortune,
    So in the Lethe of thy angry soul
    Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs
    Which thou supposest I have done to thee.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Be brief, lest that the process of thy
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. My daughter's mother thinks it with her
    So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers,
    And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Well, then, who dost thou mean shall be
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Send to her, by the man that slew her
    brothers,
    A pair of bleeding hearts; thereon engrave
    Did to thy father, steep'd in Rutland's blood-
    The purple sap from her sweet brother's body,
  KING RICHARD. You mock me, madam; this is not the way
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. There is no other way;
    Unless thou couldst put on some other shape
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but
      hate thee,
    If I did take the kingdom from your sons,
    If I have kill'd the issue of your womb,
    Than is the doating title of a mother;
    Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother;
    Again shall you be mother to a king,
    And all the ruins of distressful times
    Advantaging their loan with interest
    Go, then, my mother, to thy daughter go;
    Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the Princes
    With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. What were I best to say? Her father's
      brother
    Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
    Under what title shall I woo for thee
    That God, the law, my honour, and her love
  KING RICHARD. Tell her the King, that may command,
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. That at her hands which the King's
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. To wail the title, as her mother doth.
  KING RICHARD. As long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. But she, your subject, loathes such
    Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Profan'd, dishonour'd, and the third
    Swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd.
  KING RICHARD. Now, by the world-
  KING RICHARD. My father's death-
  KING RICHARD. Why, then, by God-
    The unity the King my husband made
    Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died.
    Had grac'd the tender temples of my child;
    And both the Princes had been breathing here,
    Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. That thou hast wronged in the time
    Hereafter time, for time past wrong'd by thee.
    The children live whose fathers thou hast slaughter'd,
    Ungovern'd youth, to wail it in their age;
    Old barren plants, to wail it with their age.
    Without her, follows to myself and thee,
    Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul,
    Therefore, dear mother-I must call you so-
    Be the attorney of my love to her;
    Urge the necessity and state of times,
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
  KING RICHARD. Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.
  KING RICHARD. But in your daughter's womb I bury them;
    Where, in that nest of spicery, they will breed
    Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.
  KING RICHARD. And be a happy mother by the deed.
  RATCLIFF. Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast
    Unarm'd, and unresolv'd to beat them back.
    'Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral;
    And there they hull, expecting but the aid
    Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.
  KING RICHARD. Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of
  KING RICHARD. Catesby, fly to the Duke.
  KING RICHARD. Ratcliff, come hither. Post to Salisbury;
    When thou com'st thither-  [To CATESBY]  Dull,
    Why stay'st thou here, and go'st not to the Duke?
  KING RICHARD. Why, what wouldst thou do there before I
    the hearing;
  KING RICHARD. Hoyday, a riddle! neither good nor bad!
    When thou mayest tell thy tale the nearest way?
  STANLEY. Richmond is on the seas.
  KING RICHARD. There let him sink, and be the seas on him!
    White-liver'd runagate, what doth he there?
    He makes for England here to claim the crown.
  KING RICHARD. Is the chair empty? Is the sword unsway'd?
    Is the King dead, the empire unpossess'd?
    What heir of York is there alive but we?
    Then tell me what makes he upon the seas.
    You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.
  STANLEY. No, my good lord; therefore mistrust me not.
  KING RICHARD. Where is thy power then, to beat him back?
    Are they not now upon the western shore,
    Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships?
  STANLEY. No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.
  KING RICHARD. Cold friends to me. What do they in the
    When they should serve their sovereign in the west?
    But I'll not trust thee.
  KING RICHARD. Go, then, and muster men. But leave behind
    Sir Edward Courtney and the haughty prelate,
    Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother,
                         Enter another MESSENGER
  SECOND MESSENGER. In Kent, my liege, the Guilfords are in
    Flock to the rebels, and their power grows strong.
                         Enter another MESSENGER
  THIRD MESSENGER. My lord, the army of great Buckingham-
    No man knows whither.
  KING RICHARD. I cry thee mercy.
    Reward to him that brings the traitor in?
                      Enter another MESSENGER
    Unto the shore, to ask those on the banks
    If they were his assistants, yea or no;
    Who answer'd him they came from Buckingham
    Upon his party. He, mistrusting them,
    Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.
  CATESBY. My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken-
    That is the best news. That the Earl of Richmond
    Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
    To Salisbury; the rest march on with me.
    That in the sty of the most deadly boar
    So, get thee gone; commend me to thy lord.
    Withal say that the Queen hath heartily consented
    And many other of great name and worth;
    And towards London do they bend their power,
    If by the way they be not fought withal.
  STANLEY. Well, hie thee to thy lord; I kiss his hand;
Enter the SHERIFF and guard, with BUCKINGHAM, led to execution
  SHERIFF. No, my good lord; therefore be patient.
    Do through the clouds behold this present hour,
  BUCKINGHAM. Why, then All-Souls' day is my body's
    This is the day which in King Edward's time
    This is the day wherein I wish'd to fall
    By the false faith of him whom most I trusted;
    Is the determin'd respite of my wrongs;
    Thus doth He force the swords of wicked men
    To turn their own points in their masters' bosoms.
    Come lead me, officers, to the block of shame;
    Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.          Exeunt
Enter RICHMOND, OXFORD, SIR JAMES BLUNT, SIR WALTER HERBERT, and others,
    Bruis'd underneath the yoke of tyranny,
    Thus far into the bowels of the land
    And here receive we from our father Stanley
    Is now even in the centre of this isle,
    Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn.
    From Tamworth thither is but one day's march.
    To reap the harvest of perpetual peace
the EARL of SURREYS and others
                      [Soldiers begin to set up the KING'S tent]
    Who hath descried the number of the traitors?
  NORFOLK. Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
    Besides, the King's name is a tower of strength,
    Which they upon the adverse faction want.
    Up with the tent! Come, noble gentlemen,
    Let us survey the vantage of the ground.
             Enter, on the other side of the field,
              and others. Some pitch RICHMOND'S tent
    And by the bright tract of his fiery car
    I'll draw the form and model of our battle,
    And by the second hour in the morning
    Desire the Earl to see me in my tent.
    South from the mighty power of the King.
    In to my tent; the dew is raw and cold.
                                   [They withdraw into the tent]
  KING RICHARD. Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge;
  KING RICHARD. Stir with the lark to-morrow, gentle Norfolk.
    Into the blind cave of eternal night.           Exit CATESBY
    Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow.
  KING RICHARD. Saw'st thou the melancholy Lord
  RATCLIFF. Thomas the Earl of Surrey and himself,
    Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.
  RATCLIFF, about the mid of night come to my tent
  RICHMOND. All comfort that the dark night can afford
    Be to thy person, noble father-in-law!
    Tell me, how fares our loving mother?
  DERBY. I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother,
    And flaky darkness breaks within the east.
    In brief, for so the season bids us be,
    Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
    And put thy fortune to the arbitrement
    With best advantage will deceive the time
    And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms;
    Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,
    Be executed in his father's sight.
    Farewell; the leisure and the fearful time
    Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
    God give us leisure for these rites of love!
    Put in their hands Thy bruising irons of wrath,
    That they may crush down with a heavy fall
    That we may praise Thee in the victory!
    Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes.
            Enter the GHOST Of YOUNG PRINCE EDWARD,
    At Tewksbury; despair, therefore, and die!
    [To RICHMOND]  Be cheerful, Richmond; for the wronged
    King Henry's issue, Richmond, comforts thee.
              Enter the GHOST of HENRY THE SIXTH
    By thee was punched full of deadly holes.
    Think on the Tower and me. Despair, and die.
    Harry the Sixth bids thee despair and die.
    Doth comfort thee in thy sleep. Live and flourish!
                   Enter the GHOST of CLARENCE
    To-morrow in the battle think on me,
    [To RICHMOND]  Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster,
    The wronged heirs of York do pray for thee.
           Enter the GHOSTS of RIVERS, GREY, and VAUGHAN
    Will conquer him. Awake and win the day.
                Enter the GHOST of HASTINGS
         Enter the GHOSTS of the two young PRINCES
  GHOSTS.  [To RICHARD]  Dream on thy cousins smothered in
    the Tower.
    And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death!
    Thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die.
    Good angels guard thee from the boar's annoy!
    Edward's unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.
          Enter the GHOST of LADY ANNE, his wife
    That never slept a quiet hour with thee
    To-morrow in the battle think on me,
    Thy adversary's wife doth pray for thee.
                   Enter the GHOST of BUCKINGHAM
  GHOST.  [To RICHARD]  The first was I that help'd thee
    to the crown;
    O, in the battle think on Buckingham,
    [To RICHMOND]  I died for hope ere I could lend thee aid;
  KING RICHARD. Give me another horse. Bind up my wounds.
    Is there a murderer here? No-yes, I am.
    O, no! Alas, I rather hate myself
    Perjury, perjury, in the high'st degree;
    Murder, stern murder, in the dir'st degree;
    Throng to the bar, crying all 'Guilty! guilty!'
    And wherefore should they, since that I myself
    Methought the souls of all that I had murder'd
    To-morrow's vengeance on the head of Richard.
  KING RICHARD. Zounds, who is there?
    Hath twice done salutation to the morn;
    Your friends are up and buckle on their armour.
  KING RICHARD By the apostle Paul, shadows to-night
    Have stuck more terror to the soul of Richard
    Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
    Under our tents I'll play the eaves-dropper,
          Enter the LORDS to RICHMOND sitting in his tent
    Methought their souls whose bodies Richard murder'd
    In the remembrance of so fair a dream.
    How far into the morning is it, lords?
  LORDS. Upon the stroke of four.
  RICHMOND. Why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction.
    The leisure and enforcement of the time
    Had rather have us win than him they follow.
    For what is he they follow? Truly, gentlemen,
    And slaughtered those that were the means to help him;
    A base foul stone, made precious by the foil
    You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain;
    Your country's foes shall pay your pains the hire;
    Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors;
    If you do free your children from the sword,
    Then, in the name of God and all these rights,
    For me, the ransom of my bold attempt
    Shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face;
    But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt
    The least of you shall share his part thereof.
  KING RICHARD. He said the truth; and what said Surrey
    then?
  KING He was in the right; and so indeed it is.
    Tell the clock there. Give me a calendar.
    Who saw the sun to-day?
  KING RICHARD. Then he disdains to shine; for by the book
    He should have brav'd the east an hour ago.
    I would these dewy tears were from the ground.
    More than to Richmond? For the selfsame heaven
  NORFOLK. Arm, arm, my lord; the foe vaunts in the field.
    I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain,
    Our archers shall be placed in the midst.
    Shall have the leading of this foot and horse.
    In the main battle, whose puissance on either side
    A thing devised by the enemy.
    Devis'd at first to keep the strong in awe.
    If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.
    Whom their o'er-cloyed country vomits forth
    You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest;
    They would restrain the one, distain the other.
    And who doth lead them but a paltry fellow,
    Long kept in Britaine at our mother's cost?
    Let's whip these stragglers o'er the seas again;
    Lash hence these over-weening rags of France,
    These famish'd beggars, weary of their lives;
    For want of means, poor rats, had hang'd themselves.
    And not these bastard Britaines, whom our fathers
    Have in their own land beaten, bobb'd, and thump'd,
    And, in record, left them the heirs of shame.
    Shall these enjoy our lands? lie with our wives,
    Ravish our daughters?  [Drum afar off]  Hark! I hear their
    Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head!
    Amaze the welkin with your broken staves!
  NORFOLK. My lord, the enemy is pass'd the marsh.
    After the battle let George Stanley die.
    Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons!
    Upon them! Victory sits on our helms.                 Exeunt
Another part of the field
    Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death.
    Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost.
    And I Will stand the hazard of the die.
    I think there be six Richmonds in the field;
Another part of the field
Alarum. Enter RICHARD and RICHMOND; they fight; RICHARD is slain.
Retreat and flourish. Enter RICHMOND, DERBY bearing the crown,
with other LORDS
    The day is ours, the bloody dog is dead.
  DERBY. Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee!
    From the dead temples of this bloody wretch
    Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
  RICHMOND. What men of name are slain on either side?
  RICHMOND. Inter their bodies as becomes their births.
    Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled
    And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,
    We will unite the white rose and the red.
    That long have frown'd upon their emnity!
    The brother blindly shed the brother's blood,
    The father rashly slaughter'd his own son,
    The son, compell'd, been butcher to the sire;
    Divided in their dire division,
    By God's fair ordinance conjoin together!
    And let their heirs, God, if thy will be so,
    Enrich the time to come with smooth-fac'd peace,
    Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,
    That would reduce these bloody days again
    Let them not live to taste this land's increase
  Paris, a young Count, kinsman to the Prince.
  Montague, heads of two houses at variance with each other.
  Capulet, heads of two houses at variance with each other.
  An old Man, of the Capulet family.
  Mercutio, kinsman to the Prince and friend to Romeo.
  An Apothecary.
    From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
    A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
    Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
    The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
    And the continuance of their parents' rage,
    Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
    Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Enter Sampson and Gregory (with swords and bucklers) of the house of Capulet.
  Greg. No, for then we should be colliers.
  Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
  Samp. A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take the
  Greg. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the
  Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are
    ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men
    from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
  Greg. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
    with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off
    their heads.
  Greg. The heads of the maids?
  Samp. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
  Samp. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis known I
    poor-John. Draw thy tool! Here comes two of the house of
           Enter two other Servingmen [Abram and Balthasar].
  Samp. My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
  Greg. No, marry. I fear thee!
  Samp. Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
  Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
  Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
    disgrace to them, if they bear it.
  Samp. [aside to Gregory] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
  Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]
  Tyb. What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
    Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.
  Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
    Or manage it to part these men with me.
  Tyb. What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
    As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
    Have at thee, coward!                            They fight.
  Officer. Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! beat them down!
  Citizens. Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
    Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
    That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
    Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
    And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
    By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
    Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets
    Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments
    Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
    For this time all the rest depart away.
    To know our farther pleasure in this case,
  Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
    I drew to part them. In the instant came
    He swung about his head and cut the winds,
    Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
  Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
    Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
    Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
    That westward rooteth from the city's side,
    And stole into the covert of the wood.
    Which then most sought where most might not be found,
  Mon. Many a morning hath he there been seen,
    With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
    But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
    Should in the farthest East bean to draw
    Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
  Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
  Mon. I neither know it nor can learn of him
  Mon. Both by myself and many other friend;
    As is the bud bit with an envious worm
    Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
    Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
  Rom. Is the day so young?
    Was that my father that went hence so fast?
  Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
  Rom. Not having that which having makes them short.
    Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
    Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
  Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.
    Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;
    This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
  Rom. What, shall I groan and tell thee?
    She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
    Examine other beauties.
  Rom. 'Tis the way
    Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair.
Enter Capulet, County Paris, and [Servant] -the Clown.
    For men so old as we to keep the peace.
    My child is yet a stranger in the world,
    She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
    Let two more summers wither in their pride
  Par. Younger than she are happy mothers made.
    She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
    Such as I love; and you among the store,
    When well apparell'd April on the heel
    Whose names are written there, and to them say,
    My house and welcome on their pleasure stay-
  Serv. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written
    that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor
    with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with
    here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath
    here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
  Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
    One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
    One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
    And the rank poison of the old will die.
  Ben. For what, I pray thee?
  Rom. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
      Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
      Lucio and the lively Helena.'
    [Gives back the paper.] A fair assembly. Whither should they come?
  Rom. Whither?
  Serv. Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich
    Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come
    Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
    With all the admired beauties of Verona.
    Go thither, and with unattainted eye
    And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
  Rom. When the devout religion of mine eye
    Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
    And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,
    Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
    Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
    But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
    Your lady's love against some other maid
  Nurse. Your mother.
  Wife. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
  Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
    'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
    Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
    For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
    Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
    My lord and you were then at Mantua.
    When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
    To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
    Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
    For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
    For even the day before, she broke her brow;
    And then my husband (God be with his soul!
    'A was a merry man) took up the child.
  Wife. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.
  Jul. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
  Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
    Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
    An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
  Wife. Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
    Are made already mothers. By my count,
    I was your mother much upon these years
    That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
    As all the world- why he's a man of wax.
  Wife. What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
    Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
    And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
    And see how one another lends content;
    Find written in the margent of his eyes,
    The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
    For fair without the fair within to hide.
    That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
    That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
  Serv. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd, my
    young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and
  Wife. We follow thee.                       Exit [Servingman].
    Juliet, the County stays.
Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six other Maskers; Torchbearers.
    Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
    After the prompter, for our entrance;
    But, let them measure us by what they will,
    We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
    Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
    So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
    And soar with them above a common bound.
    To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
    Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.
  Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
    Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
    Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
  Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
    If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
    Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
  Rom. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
  Mer. O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
    She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
    On the forefinger of an alderman,
    Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
    The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
    Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;
    Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
    Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
    Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
    Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
    Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
    Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
    Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
    Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
    And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
    And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
    Then dreams he of another benefice.
    And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
    Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
    That plats the manes of horses in the night
    And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
    This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
    That presses them and learns them first to bear,
    Making them women of good carriage.
    Which are the children of an idle brain,
    Which is as thin of substance as the air,
    And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
    Even now the frozen bosom of the North
    And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
    Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
    Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
    With this night's revels and expire the term
    But he that hath the steerage of my course
                           They march about the stage. [Exeunt.]
    and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
  1. Serv. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert, look
    to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as
    thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
    for, in the great chamber.
  3. Serv. We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys!
    Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.      Exeunt.
    Enter the Maskers, Enter, [with Servants,] Capulet, his Wife,
              Juliet, Tybalt, and all the Guests
               and Gentlewomen to the Maskers.
  Cap. Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes
    Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
                                    Music plays, and they dance.
    More light, you knaves! and turn the tables up,
    And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
    'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
    Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.
  Rom. [to a Servingman] What lady's that, which doth enrich the hand
  Rom. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
    It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
    Fetch me my rapier, boy. What, dares the slave
    Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
    Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
    A villain, that is hither come in spite
  Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.
    I would not for the wealth of all this town
    It is my will; the which if thou respect,
    Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
    Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
    You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
    This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
    Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
    This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
  Jul. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
  Rom. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
  Jul. Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
  Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
  Rom. What is her mother?
    Her mother is the lady of the house.
    Shall have the chinks.
  Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
  Rom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
    Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
    More torches here! [Exeunt Maskers.] Come on then, let's to bed.
  Jul. Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
  Jul. What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
    That I must love a loathed enemy.
    Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.        Exeunt.
    Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
    To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
    But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard.
                     [Climbs the wall and leaps down within it.]
    Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
    When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
    I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
    And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
  Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
    Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
  Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
    To be consorted with the humorous night.
    Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
  Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
    As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
  Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain
    It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
    Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
    Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
    To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
    What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
    Would through the airy region stream so bright
    Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
    When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
    And sails upon the bosom of the air.
    Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
    Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
    Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
    By any other name would smell as sweet.
    And for that name, which is no part of thee,
  Rom. I take thee at thy word.
    I know not how to tell thee who I am.
    Because it is an enemy to thee.
    Had I it written, I would tear the word.
    Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
  Rom. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
  Jul. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
    And the place death, considering who thou art,
    If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
  Rom. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
  Jul. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
  Rom. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
    Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
    And I am proof against their enmity.
  Jul. I would not for the world they saw thee here.
  Rom. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
    And but thou love me, let them find me here.
    My life were better ended by their hate
    As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
  Jul. Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;
    I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
    So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
    And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
    Which the dark night hath so discovered.
    That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-
  Jul. O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
    Which is the god of my idolatry,
    And I'll believe thee.
  Jul. Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
    Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
  Jul. I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
  Jul. But to be frank and give it thee again.
    And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
    My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
    My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
    By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
    Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
    And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
    I do beseech thee-
  Rom. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!
    Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
    Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
    Shall I send to thee?
  Rom. By the hour of nine.
  Jul. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.
    I have forgot why I did call thee back.
  Jul. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
  Rom. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
    Forgetting any other home but this.
  Jul. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
    And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
    Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
    Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
  Friar. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
    Check'ring the Eastern clouds with streaks of light;
    Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye
    The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
    O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
    In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
    For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
    But to the earth some special good doth give;
    Within the infant rind of this small flower
    Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
    Two such opposed kings encamp them still
    And where the worser is predominant,
    Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
  Rom. Good morrow, father.
    Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
    Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
  Rom. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
  Rom. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
  Friar. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
  Rom. I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
    On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
    I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
    So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
    Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
    Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
    If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
    Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
    And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:
    Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
    To lay one in, another out to have.
  Rom. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
    The other did not so.
  Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?
  Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
  Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
    Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
  Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being
    wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
    very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;
  Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
    minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
    the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
    immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.
  Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes- these
    grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange
    flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand so
    much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
    bench? O, their bones, their bones!
    thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed
    but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French
    salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
  Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
    man to bow in the hams.
  Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
  Rom. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.
    pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
    remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
  Rom. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
  Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou
    hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I
    have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
  Rom. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
    for the goose.
  Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
  Rom. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
  Rom. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to the
    goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
  Ben. Stop there, stop there!
  Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
    come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy
    the argument no longer.
  Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of
    the two.
  Mer. 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now
    upon the prick of noon.
    'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young
    found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of
  Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
                                     He walks by them and sings.
    Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
    as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law
    into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
    behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
    therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
    thee-
    And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
  Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
  Rom. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
    Within this hour my man shall be with thee
    And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
    Which to the high topgallant of my joy
    Must be my convoy in the secret night.
  Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
  Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
  Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
    when 'twas a little prating thing- O, there is a nobleman in
    her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man; but
    in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with
  Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the- No; I know
    it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
  Jul. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
    Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
    And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
    Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
    But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
  Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate.
    Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
    If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
    Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
    Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
    Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
    foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they
    are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
    My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
    your mother?
  Jul. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
    "Where is your mother?"'
    Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
    Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
    Hie you to church; I must another way,
    To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
    I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
    But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.
    Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
  Friar. So smile the heavens upon this holy act
    It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
    And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
    Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
    And in the taste confounds the appetite.
    Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
    Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
    A lover may bestride the gossamer
    That idles in the wanton summer air,
  Friar. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
  Rom. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
    To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
    Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
    Receive in either by this dear encounter.
    They are but beggars that can count their worth;
  Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
    The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
    For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
  Mer. Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the
    confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says
    'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the second
    cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
  Mer. Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for
    one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man
    Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other
    for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that
    hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a
    tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter, with another
    the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
                       Enter Tybalt and others.
  Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.
  Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
  Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men.
    Either withdraw unto some private place
  Mer. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
  Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
  Rom. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
    Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
  Tyb. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
    That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
  Rom. I do protest I never injur'd thee,
    But love thee better than thou canst devise
    Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;
    dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of
    his pitcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears
  Rom. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
    Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
    villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
  Rom. I thought all for the best.
  Rom. This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
    That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
    Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
    This but begins the woe others must end.
  Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
    Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
    Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
    Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death
    Tybalt, that murtherer, which way ran he?
    I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
  Enter Prince [attended], Old Montague, Capulet, their Wives,
                     and [others].
  Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
    There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
  Cap. Wife. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
    O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd
    How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
    Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
    Cold death aside and with the other sends
    His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
    And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
    An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
    Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
    And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I
    Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
    This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
  Cap. Wife. He is a kinsman to the Montague;
    Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
    Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
    His fault concludes but what the law should end,
    That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
    As Phaeton would whip you to the West
    Leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen.
    Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
    By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
    For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
    And he will make the face of heaven so fine
    That all the world will be in love with night
    And pay no worship to the garish sun.
    O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
    As is the night before some festival
    And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
    Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
    That Romeo bid thee fetch?
  Nurse. Ay, ay, the cords.
                                             [Throws them down.]
    Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
    Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
    I am not I, if there be such an 'I';
    Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'
  Nurse. I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
    (God save the mark!) here on his manly breast.
    All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.
  Nurse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
    That ever I should live to see thee dead!
    Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
  Nurse. It did, it did! alas the day, it did!
    Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
    When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
    These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
    Sole monarch of the universal earth.
    All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
    Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
    Was woe enough, if it had ended there;
    And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
    Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
    Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
    Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
    Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
  Jul. Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent,
    When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
  Rom. Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom
    I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
  Rom. What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?
    Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
    Hence banished is banish'd from the world,
    And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
    Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince,
    Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
    On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
    Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
    O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
    Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,
  Friar. I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;
    To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
  Friar. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
  Rom. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
  Friar. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
    Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
    And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
    Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
  Rom. Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
    Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.          Knock.
  Friar. Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
  Friar. Welcome then.
  Friar. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
  Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
    Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
    Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
    And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
    And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
    And then down falls again.
    Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
    Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
    Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
    In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
    Digressing from the valour of a man;
    Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
    What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
    There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
    Happiness courts thee in her best array;
    Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
    But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
    For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
    Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
    And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
    Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
  Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
    Either be gone before the watch be set,
    Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.
    It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
    And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
  Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft, at the Window.
    It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
    That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
    Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
  Rom. It was the lark, the herald of the morn;
    Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.
    Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
    It is some meteor that the sun exhales
    To be to thee this night a torchbearer
    And light thee on the way to Mantua.
    I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
    'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
    Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
    It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
    Some say the lark makes sweet division;
    Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;
    O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
    Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
  Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
    I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
    For in a minute there are many days.
    That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
  Rom. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
    Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
    As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
    Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
  Jul. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
    For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
  Jul. Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.
    What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
                       Enter Mother.
  Lady. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
  Jul. Feeling so the loss,
    I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
    As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
  Lady. That is because the traitor murderer lives.
  Jul. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
    And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
    That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
    To wreak the love I bore my cousin Tybalt
  Lady. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
    But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
    What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
  Lady. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
    One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
    Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
    He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
    I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
    Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
  Lady. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
  Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
    But for the sunset of my brother's son
    For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
    Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
    Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
    Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
    I would the fool were married to her grave!
    Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
  Jul. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
  Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
    I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
    Or never after look me in the face.
    Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
    And then to have a wretched puling fool,
    An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
    For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
    Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
  Jul. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
    That sees into the bottom of my grief?
    O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
    Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
    Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.            Exit.
    Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
    Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
    I think it best you married with the County.
  Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
    Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
    I'll to the friar to know his remedy.
  Par. My father Capulet will have it so,
  Friar. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
    Uneven is the course; I like it not.
    And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
    Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
    To stop the inundation of her tears,
    Now do you know the reason of this haste.
    Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
  Par. Come you to make confession to this father?
    For it was bad enough before their spite.
    Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
    My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
    Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.             Exit.
  Jul. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
    It strains me past the compass of my wits.
    And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,
    Shall be the label to another deed,
    Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
    Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
    Which the commission of thy years and art
    If, rather than to marry County Paris
    Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
    And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.
  Jul. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
    From off the battlements of yonder tower,
    Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
  Friar. Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent
    Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
    Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
    Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
    And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
    Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
    To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
    Then, as the manner of our country is,
    In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
    Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
    In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
    And hither shall he come; and he and I
    Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
    And this shall free thee from this present shame,
    Abate thy valour in the acting it.
    Farewell, dear father.
Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen,
  Serv. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can lick
    their fingers.
  Cap. How canst thou try them so?
  Jul. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
  Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
  Jul. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
    Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
    This is as't should be. Let me see the County.
    Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
  Mother. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
  Mother. We shall be short in our provision.
    And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
    I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
    I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;
    To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
                          Enter Mother.
  Mother. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
    And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
  Mother. Good night.
    Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
                                      Exeunt [Mother and Nurse.]
    That almost freezes up the heat of life.
    I'll call them back again to comfort me.
    Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
    No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
    What if it be a poison which the friar
    How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
    I wake before the time that Romeo
    Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
    To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
    And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
    Together with the terror of the place-
    Where for this many hundred years the bones
    Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
    At some hours in the night spirits resort-
    And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
    That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-
    Environed with all these hideous fears,
    And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
    And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,
    Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
        She [drinks and] falls upon her bed within the curtains.
Enter Lady of the House and Nurse.
  Lady. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
  Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
    Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
    What is there? Now, fellow,
  Fellow. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
    Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.
    And never trouble Peter for the matter.
    Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
    Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
    Ay, let the County take you in your bed!
                                     [Draws aside the curtains.]
    What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?
                           Enter Mother.
  Mother. What noise is here?
  Mother. What is the matter?
  Mother. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
    Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
                            Enter Father.
  Father. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
  Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
  Mother. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
    Life and these lips have long been separated.
    Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
  Mother. O woful time!
  Enter Friar [Laurence] and the County [Paris], with Musicians.
  Friar. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
    O son, the night before thy wedding day
    Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,
  Mother. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
    Most detestable Death, by thee beguil'd,
    By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
    To murther, murther our solemnity?
    In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
    And all the better is it for the maid.
    Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
    On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
    Turn from their office to black funeral-
    And all things change them to the contrary.
    Move them no more by crossing their high will.
  1. Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
  Pet. You will not then?
  Pet. I will then give it you soundly.
  Pet. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
  1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.
  Pet. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.
           'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
             And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
  Pet. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say for you. It
  2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the
  Rom. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep
    Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
    Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
    How doth my lady? Is my father well?
    O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
    Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
    Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
  Rom. No matter. Get thee gone
    And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
    Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
    To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
    I do remember an apothecary,
    Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
    An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
    Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
    As I remember, this should be the house.
    Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! apothecary!
                        Enter Apothecary.
  Rom. Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
    Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
    As will disperse itself through all the veins
    That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,
    And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath
    Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
    Is death to any he that utters them.
    The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;
    The world affords no law to make thee rich;
    And drink it off, and if you had the strength
    Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
    Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
    I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
    To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
  John. Holy Franciscan friar, brother, ho!
  Laur. This same should be the voice of Friar John.
  John. Going to find a barefoot brother out,
    Here in this city visiting the sick,
    And finding him, the searchers of the town,
    Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
    Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,
    So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
  Laur. Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
    Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
    So fearful were they of infection.
  Laur. Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
    Of dear import; and the neglecting it
  John. Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.                 Exit.
  Laur. Now, must I to the monument alone.
    Hath had no notice of these accidents;
Verona. A churchyard; in it the monument of the Capulets.
    Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
    Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
    So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
    But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
    Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
    Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.     [Retires.]
    The obsequies that I for thee will keep
  Rom. Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
    Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
    See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
    Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
    But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
    In what I farther shall intend to do,
    By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
    Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
    Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
    And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
                                           Romeo opens the tomb.
    It is supposed the fair creature died-
    To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
    Can vengeance be pursu'd further than death?
    Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
  Rom. I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
    Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
    Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
    But not another sin upon my head
    By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
    For I come hither arm'd against myself.
    A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
    And apprehend thee for a felon here.
  Rom. Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
  Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
    Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.                   [Dies.]
    I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
    Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
                                         [Lays him in the tomb.]
    How oft when men are at the point of death
    Have they been merry! which their keepers call
    Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
    And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
    Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
    O, what more favour can I do to thee
    And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
    For fear of that I still will stay with thee
    And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
    Here's to my love! [Drinks.] O true apothecary!
    Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
    It burneth in the Capels' monument.
  Bal. It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
  Friar. How long hath he been there?
  Friar. Go with me to the vault.
  Friar. Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
    I dreamt my master and another fought,
    What mean these masterless and gory swords
    To lie discolour'd by this place of peace? [Enters the tomb.]
    And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
    Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
    And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
    Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
  Jul. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
    Haply some poison yet doth hang on them
    This is thy sheath; there rest, and let me die.
  Boy. This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
  Chief Watch. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
                                     [Exeunt some of the Watch.]
    Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
    Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
    Raise up the Montagues; some others search.
                                   [Exeunt others of the Watch.]
    We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
    But the true ground of all these piteous woes
     Enter [some of the Watch,] with Romeo's Man [Balthasar].
  2. Watch. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.
  Chief Watch. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
          Enter Friar [Laurence] and another Watchman.
  Chief Watch. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.
              Enter the Prince [and Attendants].
            Enter Capulet and his Wife [with others].
  Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
  Wife. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
  Chief Watch. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
    With instruments upon them fit to open
    Is empty on the back of Montague,
    And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom!
               Enter Montague [and others].
    What further woe conspires against mine age?
    To press before thy father to a grave?
  Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
    Till we can clear these ambiguities
    And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
    And then will I be general of your woes
    Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
  Friar. I am the greatest, able to do least,
    Yet most suspected, as the time and place
    Doth make against me, of this direful murther;
    Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
    And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
    I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
    Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
    Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
    That he should hither come as this dire night
    Being the time the potion's force should cease.
    At the prefixed hour of her waking
    But when I came, some minute ere the time
    But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
    All this I know, and to the marriage
    Unto the rigour of severest law.
  Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.
    And then in post he came from Mantua
    This letter he early bid me give his father,
    And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,
    If I departed not and left him there.
  Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.
    Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
    Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
    And then I ran away to call the watch.
  Prince. This letter doth make good the friar's words,
    Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
    Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
    Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montage,
  Cap. O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
  Mon. But I can give thee more;
    Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
    Persons in the Induction
  PETRUCHIO, a gentleman of Verona, a suitor to Katherina
  KATHERINA, the shrew
            Padua, and PETRUCHIO'S house in the country
  SLY. Y'are a baggage; the Slys are no rogues. Look in the
    pallabris; let the world slide. Sessa!
  HOSTESS. You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
    and warm thee.
  HOSTESS. I know my remedy; I must go fetch the third-borough.
  LORD. Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds;
    Brach Merriman, the poor cur, is emboss'd;
    And couple Clowder with the deep-mouth'd brach.
    At the hedge corner, in the coldest fault?
    I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
    He cried upon it at the merest loss,
    And twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent;
    Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
    But sup them well, and look unto them all;
    See, doth he breathe?
  SECOND HUNTSMAN. He breathes, my lord. Were he not warm'd with ale,
    Wrapp'd in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,
    Would not the beggar then forget himself?
    Then take him up, and manage well the jest:
    And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet;
    Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
    Another tell him of his hounds and horse,
  LORD. Bid them come near.
    'Twas where you woo'd the gentlewoman so well.
    The rather for I have some sport in hand
    Were he the veriest antic in the world.
  LORD. Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery,
    And give them friendly welcome every one;
    Let them want nothing that my house affords.
                                       Exit one with the PLAYERS
    That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber,
    Unto their lords, by them accomplished;
    Such duty to the drunkard let him do,
    And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,
    And if the boy have not a woman's gift
    See this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst;
    Anon I'll give thee more instructions.     Exit a SERVINGMAN
    I know the boy will well usurp the grace,
    I long to hear him call the drunkard 'husband';
    And how my men will stay themselves from laughter
    When they do homage to this simple peasant.
    I'll in to counsel them; haply my presence
    May well abate the over-merry spleen,
    Which otherwise would grow into extremes.             Exeunt
               A bedchamber in the LORD'S house
             and ewer, and other appurtenances; and LORD
  SECOND SERVANT. Will't please your honour taste of these conserves?
    shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the overleather.
    profession a tinker? Ask Marian Hacket, the fat ale-wife of
    the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lying'st knave in
    O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth!
    And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.
    Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
    Or wilt thou sleep? We'll have thee to a couch
    Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed
    Say thou wilt walk: we will bestrew the ground.
    Above the morning lark. Or wilt thou hunt?
    Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
    And fetch shall echoes from the hollow earth.
    As breathed stags; ay, fleeter than the roe.
  SECOND SERVANT. Dost thou love pictures? We will fetch thee
    And Cytherea all in sedges hid,
    Even as the waving sedges play wi' th' wind.
  LORD. We'll show thee lo as she was a maid
    As lively painted as the deed was done.
    So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
  FIRST SERVANT. And, till the tears that she hath shed for thee
    She was the fairest creature in the world;
    Well, bring our lady hither to our sight;
    And rail upon the hostess of the house,
    And say you would present her at the leet,
  SLY. Ay, the woman's maid of the house.
    And twenty more such names and men as these,
           Enter the PAGE as a lady, with ATTENDANTS
  SLY. I thank thee; thou shalt not lose by it.
  SLY. Madam wife, they say that I have dream'd
  PAGE. Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,
    Or, if not so, until the sun be set.
    be loath to fall into my dreams again. I will therefore tarry in
    despite of the flesh and the blood.
    And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy.
    Therefore they thought it good you hear a play
    Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
  SLY. Marry, I will; let them play it. Is not a comonty a
    the world slip;-we shall ne'er be younger.
          A flourish of trumpets announces the play
  LUCENTIO. Tranio, since for the great desire I had
    And by my father's love and leave am arm'd
    Here let us breathe, and haply institute
    Gave me my being and my father first,
    A merchant of great traffic through the world,
    Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii;
    And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study,
    A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep,
    To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
    The mathematics and the metaphysics,
    Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.
  BAPTISTA. Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
    Before I have a husband for the elder.
    If either of you both love Katherina,
  GREMIO. To cart her rather. She's too rough for me.
    There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?
    To make a stale of me amongst these mates?
  LUCENTIO. But in the other's silence do I see
    And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
    For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
    Put finger in the eye, an she knew why.
    On them to look, and practise by myself.
    And make her bear the penance of her tongue?
    Prefer them hither; for to cunning men
    And so, farewell. Katherina, you may stay;
  GREMIO. You may go to the devil's dam; your gifts are so good
    Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together, and fast it fairly
    out; our cake's dough on both sides. Farewell; yet, for the love
    father.
    the nature of our quarrel yet never brook'd parle, know now, upon
  GREMIO. I say a devil. Think'st thou, Hortensio, though her father
    endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellows in the
    world, an a man could light on them, would take her with all
    condition: to be whipp'd at the high cross every morning.
  HORTENSIO. Faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten
    for a husband, and then have to't afresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man
    be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring. How say you,
  GREMIO. I am agreed; and would I had given him the best horse in
    and bed her, and rid the house of her! Come on.
    I found the effect of love in idleness;
    And now in plainness do confess to thee,
    As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was-
    Affection is not rated from the heart;
  TRANIO. Master, you look'd so longly on the maid.
    Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.
    Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
    When with his knees he kiss'd the Cretan strand.
    That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
    And with her breath she did perfume the air;
  TRANIO. Nay, then 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
    I pray, awake, sir. If you love the maid,
    That, till the father rid his hands of her,
    And therefore has he closely mew'd her up,
  LUCENTIO. Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he!
    And undertake the teaching of the maid-
    Visit his countrymen, and banquet them?
  LUCENTIO. Basta, content thee, for I have it full.
    I will some other be- some Florentine,
    Uncase thee; take my colour'd hat and cloak.
    When Biondello comes, he waits on thee;
    For so your father charg'd me at our parting:
    Although I think 'twas in another sense-
    Here comes the rogue. Sirrah, where have you been?
    Master, has my fellow Tranio stol'n your clothes?
    Or you stol'n his? or both? Pray, what's the news?
  LUCENTIO. Sirrah, come hither; 'tis no time to jest,
    And therefore frame your manners to the time.
  TRANIO. So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
    When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio;
    To make one among these wooers. If thou ask me why-
  FIRST SERVANT. My lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.
  SLY. Yes, by Saint Anne do I. A good matter, surely; comes there
    Is there any man has rebus'd your worship?
    And then I know after who comes by the worst.
                                     [He wrings him by the ears]
  HORTENSIO. How now! what's the matter? My old friend Grumio and my
  PETRUCHIO. Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
    Then had not Grumio come by the worst.
    I bade the rascal knock upon your gate,
  GRUMIO. Knock at the gate? O heavens! Spake you not these words
    knock me soundly'? And come you now with 'knocking at the gate'?
  PETRUCHIO. Such wind as scatters young men through the world
    To seek their fortunes farther than at home,
    Antonio, my father, is deceas'd,
    And so am come abroad to see the world.
  HORTENSIO. Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee
    And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favour'd wife?
    And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich,
    And I'll not wish thee to her.
    Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
    As are the swelling Adriatic seas.
    If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
    I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
    Tell me her father's name, and 'tis enough;
    As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
  HORTENSIO. Her father is Baptista Minola,
    Her name is Katherina Minola,
  PETRUCHIO. I know her father, though I know not her;
    And he knew my deceased father well.
    And therefore let me be thus bold with you
    Unless you will accompany me thither.
  GRUMIO. I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts. O' my
  HORTENSIO. Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
    He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
    And her withholds from me, and other more,
    That ever Katherina will be woo'd.
    Till Katherine the curst have got a husband.
  GRUMIO. Katherine the curst!
    A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
  GRUMIO. Here's no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks, how the
    young folks lay their heads together! Master, master, look about
    you. Who goes there, ha?
  HORTENSIO. Peace, Grumio! It is the rival of my love. Petruchio,
  GREMIO. O, very well; I have perus'd the note.
    Hark you, sir; I'll have them very fairly bound-
    And see you read no other lectures to her.
    And let me have them very well perfum'd;
    To whom they go to. What will you read to her?
    Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
    About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca;
    And other books- good ones, I warrant ye.
    Hath promis'd me to help me to another,
    I'll tell you news indifferent good for either.
    Will undertake to woo curst Katherine;
    My father dead, my fortune lives for me;
  PETRUCHIO. Why came I hither but to that intent?
    Have I not heard the sea, puff'd up with winds,
    Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
    And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
    Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way
    To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
  BIONDELLO. He that has the two fair daughters; is't he you mean?
    Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
  TRANIO. Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
    That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.
  HORTENSIO. That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
    To whom my father is not all unknown,
  PETRUCHIO. Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
    As is the other for beauteous modesty.
  PETRUCHIO. Sir, sir, the first's for me; let her go by.
    Her father keeps from all access of suitors,
    Until the elder sister first be wed.
    The younger then is free, and not before.
  TRANIO. If it be so, sir, that you are the man
    Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest;
    And if you break the ice, and do this feat,
    Achieve the elder, set the younger free
    That I disdain; but for these other gawds,
    Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
  KATHERINA. Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tell
  BIANCA. Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
    Which I could fancy more than any other.
  KATHERINA. O then, belike, you fancy riches more:
    Nay, then you jest; and now I well perceive
    I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.
  KATHERINA. [Strikes her]  If that be jest, then an the rest was so.
    Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
    When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
  BAPTISTA. What, in my sight? Bianca, get thee in.
        Enter GREMIO, with LUCENTIO in the habit of a mean man;
    Call'd Katherina, fair and virtuous?
  BAPTISTA. I have a daughter, sir, call'd Katherina.
    Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
    Cunning in music and the mathematics,
    But for my daughter Katherine, this I know,
    She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
    express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly
    Rheims; as cunning in Greek, Latin, and other languages, as the
    other in music and mathematics. His name is Cambio. Pray accept
    May I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
  TRANIO. Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own
    In the preferment of the eldest sister.
    I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo,
    And free access and favour as the rest.
    And toward the education of your daughters
    If you accept them, then their worth is great.
    Take you the lute, and you the set of books;
    Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
    To my daughters; and tell them both
    These are their tutors. Bid them use them well.
                Exit SERVANT leading HORTENSIO carrying the lute
                                     and LUCENTIO with the books
    We will go walk a little in the orchard,
    And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,
    You knew my father well, and in him me,
    Which I have bettered rather than decreas'd.
  BAPTISTA. After my death, the one half of my lands
    Let specialities be therefore drawn between us,
    That covenants may be kept on either hand.
  BAPTISTA. Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd,
  PETRUCHIO. Why, that is nothing; for I tell you, father,
    And where two raging fires meet together,
    They do consume the thing that feeds their fury.
  PETRUCHIO. Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds,
    That shake not though they blow perpetually.
  BAPTISTA. Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
  HORTENSIO. Why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me.
    'Frets, call you these?' quoth she 'I'll fume with them.'
    And with that word she struck me on the head,
    And through the instrument my pate made way;
    And there I stood amazed for a while,
    As on a pillory, looking through the lute,
  PETRUCHIO. Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench;
    Say that she rail; why, then I'll tell her plain
    If she deny to wed, I'll crave the day
    When I shall ask the banns, and when be married.
    They call me Katherine that do talk of me.
    And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst;
    But, Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom,
    For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
    Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
    Myself am mov'd to woo thee for my wife.
  KATHERINA. Mov'd! in good time! Let him that mov'd you hither
    Remove you hence. I knew you at the first
  PETRUCHIO. Alas, good Kate, I will not burden thee!
    For, knowing thee to be but young and light-
  PETRUCHIO. O, slow-wing'd turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?
  PETRUCHIO. My remedy is then to pluck it out.
  KATHERINA. Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.
    And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
  PETRUCHIO. Why, here's no crab; and therefore look not sour.
  KATHERINA. There is, there is.
  KATHERINA. Yet you are wither'd.
    Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
    Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
    O sland'rous world! Kate like the hazel-twig
    As hazel-nuts, and sweeter than the kernels.
    O, let me see thee walk. Thou dost not halt.
    And then let Kate be chaste, and Dian sportful!
  PETRUCHIO. It is extempore, from my mother wit.
  KATHERINA. A witty mother! witless else her son.
  PETRUCHIO. Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy bed.
    And therefore, setting all this chat aside,
    Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
    Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,
    Conformable as other household Kates.
    Here comes your father. Never make denial;
    I must and will have Katherine to my wife.
  BAPTISTA. Why, how now, daughter Katherine, in your dumps?
    You have show'd a tender fatherly regard
    That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
  PETRUCHIO. Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world
    For,she's not froward, but modest as the dove;
    She is not hot, but temperate as the morn;
    And, to conclude, we have 'greed so well together
    That upon Sunday is the wedding-day.
  KATHERINA. I'll see thee hang'd on Sunday first.
  GREMIO. Hark, Petruchio; she says she'll see thee hang'd first.
  TRANIO. Is this your speeding? Nay, then good-night our part!
    How much she loves me- O, the kindest Kate!
    A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
    To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.
    Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests;
    I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine.
  PETRUCHIO. Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu.
    'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.
  BAPTISTA. The gain I seek is quiet in the match.
    Now is the day we long have looked for;
    'Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both
  GREMIO. First, as you know, my house within the city
    I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,
    I am my father's heir and only son;
    Besides two thousand ducats by the year
  GREMIO. Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
  TRANIO. Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
  TRANIO. Why, then the maid is mine from all the world
  BAPTISTA. I must confess your offer is the best;
    And let your father make her the assurance,
    My daughter Katherine is to be married;
    Now, on the Sunday following shall Bianca
    Now, I fear thee not.
    Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
    To give thee all, and in his waning age
  TRANIO. A vengeance on your crafty withered hide!
    Must get a father, call'd suppos'd Vincentio;
    And that's a wonder- fathers commonly
    Do get their children; but in this case of wooing
    Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
    Her sister Katherine welcome'd you withal?
    To know the cause why music was ordain'd!
    Was it not to refresh the mind of man
  HORTENSIO. Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
    I arn no breeching scholar in the schools,
    Take you your instrument, play you the whiles!
  BIANCA. Construe them.
    port- 'celsa senis' that we might beguile the old pantaloon.
  BIANCA. Let's hear. O fie! the treble jars.
  LUCENTIO. Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
  LUCENTIO. All but the bass.
  HORTENSIO. The bass is right; 'tis the base knave that jars.
    Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love.
    Was Ajax, call'd so from his grandfather.
  HORTENSIO. Madam, before you touch the instrument
    To learn the order of my fingering,
    And there it is in writing fairly drawn.
  HORTENSIO. Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.
         '"Gamut" I am, the ground of all accord-
  SERVANT. Mistress, your father prays you leave your books
    You know to-morrow is the wedding-day.
  LUCENTIO. Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
    Seize thee that list. If once I find thee ranging,
  HORTENSIO will be quit with thee by changing.             Exit
  BAPTISTA.  [To TRANIO]  Signior Lucentio, this is the 'pointed day
    That Katherine and Petruchio should be married,
    To want the bridegroom when the priest attends
    To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage!
    He'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
    Make friends invited, and proclaim the banns;
    Now must the world point at poor Katherine,
    And say 'Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
  TRANIO. Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too.
  KATHERINA. Would Katherine had never seen him though!
                    Exit, weeping, followed by BIANCA and others
  BAPTISTA. Go, girl, I cannot blame thee now to weep,
  BAPTISTA. What then?
  BIONDELLO. When he stands where I am and sees you there.
    that have been candle-cases, one buckled, another lac'd; an old
    rusty sword ta'en out of the town armoury, with a broken hilt,
    with the glanders and like to mose in the chine, troubled with
    the lampass, infected with the fashions, full of windgalls, sped
    with spavins, rayed with the yellows, past cure of the fives,
    stark spoil'd with the staggers, begnawn with the bots, sway'd in
    the back and shoulder-shotten, near-legg'd before, and with a
    half-cheek'd bit, and a head-stall of sheep's leather which,
    name fairly set down in studs, and here and there piec'd with
  BIONDELLO. O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparison'd like
    the horse- with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose
    on the other, gart'red with a red and blue list; an old hat, and
    the humour of forty fancies prick'd in't for a feather; a
  PETRUCHIO. Come, where be these gallants? Who's at home?
    How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown;
    As if they saw some wondrous monument,
    And sent you hither so unlike yourself?
  TRANIO. See not your bride in these unreverent robes;
    Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
  PETRUCHIO. Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with words;
    To me she's married, not unto my clothes.
    As I can change these poor accoutrements,
    And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
  BAPTISTA. I'll after him and see the event of this.
    Her father's liking; which to bring to pass,
    Which once perform'd, let all the world say no,
    I'll keep mine own despite of all the world.
    We'll over-reach the greybeard, Gremio,
    The narrow-prying father, Minola,
    Signior Gremio, came you from the church?
  TRANIO. And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
    A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
  TRANIO. Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.
    I'll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest
    Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,
    That, all amaz'd, the priest let fall the book;
    'Now take them up,' quoth he 'if any list.'
  TRANIO. What said the wench, when he rose again?
    As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
    After a storm; quaff'd off the muscadel,
    And threw the sops all in the sexton's face,
    Having no other reason
    This done, he took the bride about the neck,
    That at the parting all the church did echo.
    And I, seeing this, came thence for very shame;
    And after me, I know, the rout is coming.
    Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.         [Music plays]
    And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
    You would entreat me rather go than stay.
    Dine with my father, drink a health to me.
  GRUMIO. Ay, sir, they be ready; the oats have eaten the horses.
  KATHERINA. Nay, then,
    The door is open, sir; there lies your way;
    That take it on you at the first so roundly.
  PETRUCHIO. O Kate, content thee; prithee be not angry.
    Father, be quiet; he shall stay my leisure.
  KATHERINA. Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner.
    Obey the bride, you that attend on her;
    Go to the feast, revel and domineer,
    I'll bring mine action on the proudest he
    Fear not, sweet wench; they shall not touch thee, Kate;
    I'll buckler thee against a million.
  BAPTISTA. Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
  GREMIO. Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
  TRANIO. Of all mad matches, never was the like.
    For to supply the places at the table,
    You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
    Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place;
    ever man so weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and they are
    coming after to warm them. Now were not I a little pot and soon
    hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof
    thaw me. But I with blowing the fire shall warm myself; for,
    considering the weather, a taller man than I will take cold.
  GRUMIO. O, ay, Curtis, ay; and therefore fire, fire; cast on no
    am I at the least. But wilt thou make a fire, or shall I complain
    on thee to our mistress, whose hand- she being now at hand- thou
  CURTIS. I prithee, good Grumio, tell me how goes the world?
    therefore fire. Do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master and
  CURTIS. There's fire ready; and therefore, good Grumio, the news?
  GRUMIO. Why, therefore, fire; for I have caught extreme cold.
    Where's the cook? Is supper ready, the house trimm'd, rushes
    strew'd, cobwebs swept, the serving-men in their new fustian,
    their white stockings, and every officer his wedding-garment on?
    Be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without, the carpets
  CURTIS. All ready; and therefore, I pray thee, news.
  GRUMIO. Out of their saddles into the dirt; and thereby hangs a
  GRUMIO. And therefore 'tis call'd a sensible tale; and this cuff
  GRUMIO. What's that to thee?
  GRUMIO. Tell thou the tale. But hadst thou not cross'd me, thou
    bemoil'd, how he left her with the horse upon her, how he beat me
    because her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt to
    before, how I cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was
  GRUMIO. Ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find
    Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the
    rest; let their heads be sleekly comb'd, their blue coats brush'd
    and their garters of an indifferent knit; let them curtsy with
    their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my mastcr's
    horse-tail till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?
  GRUMIO. Call them forth.
  CURTIS. I call them forth to credit her.
  GRUMIO. Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.
  GRUMIO. E'en at hand, alighted by this; and therefore be not-
  PETRUCHIO. Where be these knaves? What, no man at door
    Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
    Did I not bid thee meet me in the park
    And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
    Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
                                   Exeunt some of the SERVINGMEN
    [Sings]  Where is the life that late I led?
    [Sings]  It was the friar of orders grey,
    Take that, and mend the plucking off the other.
    And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither:
  PETRUCHIO. 'Tis burnt; and so is all the meat.
    What dogs are these? Where is the rascal cook?
    How durst you villains bring it from the dresser
                                [Throws the meat, etc., at them]
    You heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves!
  PETRUCHIO. I tell thee, Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away,
    Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.        Exeunt
  NATHANIEL. Peter, didst ever see the like?
    Away, away! for he is coming hither.                  Exeunt
    For then she never looks upon her lure.
    Another way I have to man my haggard,
    That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites
    As with the meat, some undeserved fault
    I'll find about the making of the bed;
    And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,
    This way the coverlet, another way the sheets;
    And with the clamour keep her still awake.
    Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
    Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.
    Lov'd none in the world so well as Lucentio.
    I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.
  HORTENSIO. See, how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio,
    As one unworthy all the former favours
  TRANIO. And here I take the like unfeigned oath,
  HORTENSIO. Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
    Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
  TRANIO. Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.
  BIANCA. The taming-school! What, is there such a place?
  TRANIO. Ay, mistress; and Petruchio is the master,
    An ancient angel coming down the hill
    Will serve the turn.
    In gait and countenance surely like a father.
    As if he were the right Vincentio.
    Take in your love, and then let me alone.
    Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
  PEDANT. Sir, at the farthest for a week or two;
    But then up farther, and as far as Rome;
    To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?
    Your ships are stay'd at Venice; and the Duke,
    From Florence, and must here deliver them.
  TRANIO. Among them know you one Vincentio?
  TRANIO. He is my father, sir; and, sooth to say,
    And think it not the worst of all your fortunes
    Till you have done your business in the city.
  TRANIO. Then go with me to make the matter good.
    This, by the way, I let you understand:
    My father is here look'd for every day
    In all these circumstances I'll instruct you.
    Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.              Exeunt
  KATHERINA. The more my wrong, the more his spite appears.
    Beggars that come unto my father's door
    If not, elsewhere they meet with charity;
    And that which spites me more than all these wants-
    I prithee go and get me some repast;
  KATHERINA. 'Tis passing good; I prithee let me have it.
  GRUMIO. Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
  KATHERINA. Why then the beef, and let the mustard rest.
  GRUMIO. Nay, then I will not; you shall have the mustard,
  GRUMIO. Why then the mustard without the beef.
  KATHERINA. Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
    That feed'st me with the very name of meat.
    Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you
    Go, get thee gone, I say.
    To dress thy meat myself, and bring it thee.
    What, not a word? Nay, then thou lov'st it not,
    And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.
    Will we return unto thy father's house
    And revel it as bravely as the best,
    Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments;
    Lay forth the gown.
  HABERDASHER. Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.
  KATHERINA. I'll have no bigger; this doth fit the time,
    And gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
    And not till then.
    My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
    And rather than it shall, I will be free
    Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.
    I love thee well in that thou lik'st it not.
  KATHERINA. Love me or love me not, I like the cap;
  HORTENSIO.  [Aside]  I see she's like to have neither cap nor gown.
    According to the fashion and the time.
    I did not bid you mar it to the time.
  PETRUCHIO. Why, true; he means to make a puppet of thee.
    Or I shall so bemete thee with thy yard
    I tell thee, I, that thou hast marr'd her gown.
  TAILOR. Your worship is deceiv'd; the gown is made
  GRUMIO. I gave him no order; I gave him the stuff.
    will neither be fac'd nor brav'd. I say unto thee, I bid thy
    master cut out the gown; but I did not bid him cut it to pieces.
  TAILOR. Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify.
  GRUMIO. Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in the
  GRUMIO. I confess the cape.
  PETRUCHIO. Ay, there's the villainy.
  GRUMIO. Error i' th' bill, sir; error i' th' bill! I commanded the
    prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.
  TAILOR. This is true that I say; an I had thee in place where, thou
  GRUMIO. I am for thee straight; take thou the bill, give me thy
  PETRUCHIO. Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
  GRUMIO. O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for.
  PETRUCHIO.  [Aside]  Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid.-
  HORTENSIO. Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown to-morrow;
  PETRUCHIO. Well, come, my Kate; we will unto your father's
    Even in these honest mean habiliments;
    For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich;
    And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
    So honour peereth in the meanest habit.
    What, is the jay more precious than the lark
    Because his feathers are more beautiful?
    Or is the adder better than the eel
    Because his painted skin contents the eye?
    O no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse
    And therefore frolic; we will hence forthwith
    To feast and sport us at thy father's house.
    There will we mount, and thither walk on foot.
    And well we may come there by dinner-time.
    And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.
  HORTENSIO. Why, so this gallant will command the sun.
Enter TRANIO as LUCENTIO, and the PEDANT dressed like VINCENTIO
  TRANIO. Sir, this is the house; please it you that I call?
    Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
    With such austerity as longeth to a father.
    Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.
  BIONDELLO. I told him that your father was at Venice,
  TRANIO. Th'art a tall fellow; hold thee that to drink.
    [To To the PEDANT] Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of;
    I pray you stand good father to me now;
    To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
    And- for the good report I hear of you,
    And for the love he beareth to your daughter,
    I am content, in a good father's care,
    Or both dissemble deeply their affections;
    And therefore, if you say no more than this,
    That like a father you will deal with him,
  TRANIO. I thank you, sir. Where then do you know best
    As shall with either part's agreement stand?
    There doth my father lie; and there this night
    We'll pass the business privately and well.
    My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
    Lucentio's father is arriv'd in Padua,
  BIONDELLO. I pray the gods she may, with all my heart.
  TRANIO. Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
    Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
    the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
  LUCENTIO. I pray thee moralize them.
  BIONDELLO. Then thus: Baptista is safe, talking with the deceiving
    father of a deceitful son.
  BIONDELLO. His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
  LUCENTIO. And then?
  BIONDELLO. I cannot tell, except they are busied about a
    ad imprimendum solum; to th' church take the priest, clerk, and
    as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit; and so
    go to Saint Luke's to bid the priest be ready to come against you
    She will be pleas'd; then wherefore should I doubt?
  PETRUCHIO. Come on, a God's name; once more toward our father's.
    Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
  PETRUCHIO. I say it is the moon that shines so bright.
  KATHERINA. I know it is the sun that shines so bright.
  PETRUCHIO. Now by my mother's son, and that's myself,
    Or ere I journey to your father's house.
  PETRUCHIO. I say it is the moon.
  KATHERINA. I know it is the moon.
  PETRUCHIO. Nay, then you lie; it is the blessed sun.
  KATHERINA. Then, God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun;
    And the moon changes even as your mind.
    And so it shall be so for Katherine.
  HORTENSIO. Petruchio, go thy ways, the field is won.
  PETRUCHIO. Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run,
    And not unluckily against the bias.
    Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.
  HORTENSIO. 'A will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.
    Whither away, or where is thy abode?
    Happy the parents of so fair a child;
    Happier the man whom favourable stars
    Allots thee for his lovely bed-fellow.
    This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, withered,
  KATHERINA. Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,
    That have been so bedazzled with the sun
    Now I perceive thou art a reverend father.
    Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
    And bound I am to Padua, there to visit
  PETRUCHIO. Happily met; the happier for thy son.
    I may entitle thee my loving father:
    Upon the company you overtake?
  HORTENSIO. I do assure thee, father, so it is.
  PETRUCHIO. Come, go along, and see the truth hereof;
    For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
  BIONDELLO. Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
  LUCENTIO. I fly, Biondello; but they may chance to need the at
    home, therefore leave us.
  BIONDELLO. Nay, faith, I'll see the church a your back, and then
  PETRUCHIO. Sir, here's the door; this is Lucentio's house;
    My father's bears more toward the market-place;
    Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
                                [PEDANT looks out of the window]
  PEDANT. What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
    Signior Lucentio that his father is come from Pisa, and is here
    at the door to speak with him.
  PEDANT. Thou liest: his father is come from Padua, and here looking
    out at the window.
  VINCENTIO. Art thou his father?
  PEDANT. Ay, sir; so his mother says, if I may believe her.
    Why, this is flat knavery to take upon you another man's name.
  PEDANT. Lay hands on the villain; I believe 'a means to cozen
  BIONDELLO. I have seen them in the church together. God send 'em
  VINCENTIO.  [Seeing BIONDELLO]  Come hither, crack-hemp.
  VINCENTIO. Come hither, you rogue. What, have you forgot me?
    master's father, Vincentio?
    where he looks out of the window.
  PETRUCHIO. Prithee, Kate, let's stand aside and see the end of this
    and a copatain hat! O, I am undone! I am undone! While I play the
    good husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at the
  TRANIO. How now! what's the matter?
  BAPTISTA. What, is the man lunatic?
    wear pearl and gold? I thank my good father, I am able to
  VINCENTIO. Thy father! O villain! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.
    only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vicentio.
    him, I charge you, in the Duke's name. O, my son, my son! Tell
    Carry this mad knave to the gaol. Father Baptista, I charge you
  VINCENTIO. Carry me to the gaol!
    this business; I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.
  GREMIO. Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.
  BAPTISTA. Away with the dotard; to the gaol with him!
  LUCENTIO.  [Kneeling]  Pardon, sweet father.
  BIANCA. Pardon, dear father.
    Right son to the right Vincentio,
  LUCENTIO. Love wrought these miracles. Bianca's love
    While he did bear my countenance in the town;
    And happily I have arrived at the last
    Unto the wished haven of my bliss.
    Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
  VINCENTIO. I'll slit the villain's nose that would have sent me to
    the gaol.
  BAPTISTA. And I to sound the depth of this knavery.       Exit
  LUCENTIO. Look not pale, Bianca; thy father will not frown.
  GREMIO. My cake is dough, but I'll in among the rest;
    Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.           Exit
  KATHERINA. Husband, let's follow to see the end of this ado.
  KATHERINA. What, in the midst of the street?
  PETRUCHIO. Why, then, let's home again. Come, sirrah, let's away.
  KATHERINA. Nay, I will give thee a kiss; now pray thee, love, stay.
Enter BAPTISTA, VINCENTIO, GREMIO, the PEDANT, LUCENTIO, BIANCA,
    My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,
    Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina,
    Feast with the best, and welcome to my house.
  WIDOW. He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
  KATHERINA. 'He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.'
  PETRUCHIO. Spoke like an officer- ha' to thee, lad.
  BAPTISTA. How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
  GREMIO. Believe me, sir, they butt together well.
  BIANCA. Ay, but not frighted me; therefore I'll sleep again.
    And then pursue me as you draw your bow.
  LUCENTIO. I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.
    And, as the jest did glance away from me,
    I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
  PETRUCHIO. Well, I say no; and therefore, for assurance,
    Shall win the wager which we will propose.
  HORTENSIO. Content. What's the wager?
  LUCENTIO. A hundred then.
    Nay, then she must needs come.
  PETRUCHIO. The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
  BAPTISTA. Now, by my holidame, here comes Katherina!
  KATHERINA. They sit conferring by the parlour fire.
  PETRUCHIO. Go, fetch them hither; if they deny to come.
    Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.
    Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
  BAPTISTA. Now fair befall thee, good Petruchio!
    Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
    Another dowry to another daughter,
    Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not:
  PETRUCHIO. Katherine, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women
    What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
    It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,
    Thy head, thy sovereign; one that cares for thee,
    To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
    And craves no other tribute at thy hands
    Such duty as the subject owes the prince,
    To offer war where they should kneel for peace;
    When they are bound to serve, love, and obey.
    Unapt to toll and trouble in the world,
  PETRUCHIO. Why, there's a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.
    [To LUCENTIO]  'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white;
  SEBASTIAN, his brother
  PROSPERO, the right Duke of Milan
  ANTONIO, his brother, the usurping Duke of Milan
  FERDINAND, son to the King of Naples
  Other Spirits attending on Prospero
    yare, yare! Take in the topsail. Tend to th' master's
  ALONSO. Good boatswain, have care. Where's the master?
    Play the men.
  ANTONIO. Where is the master, boson?
    keep your cabins; you do assist the storm.
  BOATSWAIN. When the sea is. Hence! What cares these
    roarers for the name of king? To cabin! silence! Trouble
    counsellor; if you can command these elements to
    silence, and work the peace of the present, we will not
    in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so
    make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth
  BOATSWAIN. Down with the topmast. Yare, lower, lower!
    plague upon this howling! They are louder than the
    weather or our office.
  BOATSWAIN. Work you, then.
  GONZALO. I'll warrant him for drowning, though the ship were
    Let's assist them,
    For our case is as theirs.
    Farewell, brother! We split, we split, we split!]
  MIRANDA. If by your art, my dearest father, you have
    Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.
    But that the sea, mounting to th' welkin's cheek,
    Dashes the fire out. O, I have suffered
    Dash'd all to pieces! O, the cry did knock
    Against my very heart! Poor souls, they perish'd.
    Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere
    It should the good ship so have swallow'd and
  MIRANDA. O, woe the day!
    I have done nothing but in care of thee,
    Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter, who
    And thy no greater father.
    I should inform thee farther. Lend thy hand,
    Lie there my art. Wipe thou thine eyes; have comfort.
    The direful spectacle of the wreck, which touch'd
    The very virtue of compassion in thee,
    So safely ordered that there is no soul-
    Betid to any creature in the vessel
    Sit down, for thou must now know farther.
    The very minute bids thee ope thine ear.
    I do not think thou canst; for then thou wast not
  PROSPERO. By what? By any other house, or person?
    Of any thing the image, tell me, that
    And rather like a dream than an assurance
    In the dark backward and abysm of time?
    Thy father was the Duke of Milan, and
  MIRANDA. Sir, are not you my father?
  PROSPERO. Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and
    She said thou wast my daughter; and thy father
  MIRANDA. O, the heavens!
    What foul play had we that we came from thence?
    By foul play, as thou say'st, were we heav'd thence;
    But blessedly holp hither.
    Which is from my remembrance. Please you, farther.
  PROSPERO. My brother and thy uncle, call'd Antonio-
    I pray thee, mark me that a brother should
    Of all the world I lov'd, and to him put
    Through all the signories it was the first,
    And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed
    In dignity, and for the liberal arts
    The government I cast upon my brother
    How to deny them, who t' advance, and who
    Or else new form'd 'em; having both the key
  PROSPERO. I pray thee, mark me.
    To closeness and the bettering of my mind
    O'er-priz'd all popular rate, in my false brother
    He was indeed the Duke; out o' th' substitution,
  MIRANDA. O the heavens!
  PROSPERO. Mark his condition, and th' event, then tell me
    If this might be a brother.
    To think but nobly of my grandmother:
  PROSPERO. Now the condition:
    To me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit;
    Out of the dukedom, and confer fair Milan
    With all the honours on my brother. Whereon,
    The ministers for th' purpose hurried thence
    I, not rememb'ring how I cried out then,
  PROSPERO. Hear a little further,
    And then I'll bring thee to the present busines
    Which now's upon 's; without the which this story
  MIRANDA. Wherefore did they not
    My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not,
    So dear the love my people bore me; nor set
    A mark so bloody on the business; but
    With colours fairer painted their foul ends.
    In few, they hurried us aboard a bark;
    Bore us some leagues to sea, where they prepared
    Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats
    Instinctively have quit it. There they hoist us,
    Was I then to you!
    When I have deck'd the sea with drops full salt,
    Out of his charity, who being then appointed
    Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.
    Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
    Than other princess' can, that have more time
    To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
    On the curl'd clouds. To thy strong bidding task
    Perform'd to point the tempest that I bade thee?
    I boarded the King's ship; now on the beak,
    Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,
    And burn in many places; on the topmast,
    Then meet and join Jove's lightning, the precursors
    And sight-outrunning were not; the fire and cracks
    Of sulphurous roaring the most mighty Neptune
    But felt a fever of the mad, and play'd
    Plung'd in the foaming brine, and quit the vessel,
    Then all afire with me; the King's son, Ferdinand,
    With hair up-staring-then like reeds, not hair-
    Was the first man that leapt; cried 'Hell is empty,
    And all the devils are here.'
  PROSPERO. But are they, Ariel, safe?
    On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
    In troops I have dispers'd them 'bout the isle.
    Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs
    In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting,
  PROSPERO. Of the King's ship,
    And all the rest o' th' fleet?
    Is the King's ship; in the deep nook, where once
    From the still-vex'd Bermoothes, there she's hid;
    Who, with a charm join'd to their suff'red labour,
    I have left asleep; and for the rest o' th' fleet,
    Which I dispers'd, they all have met again,
    And are upon the Mediterranean flote
    Supposing that they saw the King's ship wreck'd,
    Exactly is perform'd; but there's more work.
    What is the time o' th' day?
  ARIEL. Past the mid season.
  ARIEL. Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,
    Let me remember thee what thou hast promis'd,
  PROSPERO. Before the time be out? No more!
  ARIEL. I prithee,
    Remember I have done thee worthy service,
    Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings, serv'd
    From what a torment I did free thee?
  PROSPERO. Thou dost; and think'st it much to tread the ooze
    Of the salt deep,
    To run upon the sharp wind of the north,
    To do me business in the veins o' th' earth
  PROSPERO. This blue-ey'd hag was hither brought with child,
    As thou report'st thyself, wast then her servant;
    Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee,
    And left thee there, where thou didst vent thy groans
    Save for the son that she did litter here,
    What torment I did find thee in; thy groans
    Did make wolves howl, and penetrate the breasts
    To lay upon the damn'd, which Sycorax
    When I arriv'd and heard thee, that made gape
    The pine, and let thee out.
  ARIEL. I thank thee, master.
    And peg thee in his knotty entrails, till
    I will discharge thee.
    And hither come in 't. Go, hence with diligence!
  PROSPERO. Come forth, I say; there's other business for thee.
  PROSPERO. Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself
  CALIBAN. As wicked dew as e'er my mother brush'd
    With raven's feather from unwholesome fen
    Shall, for that vast of night that they may work,
    All exercise on thee; thou shalt be pinch'd
    This island's mine, by Sycorax my mother,
    To name the bigger light, and how the less,
    That burn by day and night; and then I lov'd thee,
    And show'd thee all the qualities o' th' isle,
    Curs'd be I that did so! All the charms
    For I am all the subjects that you have,
    Whom stripes may move, not kindness! I have us'd thee,
    Filth as thou art, with human care, and lodg'd thee
    Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee,
    Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
    One thing or other. When thou didst not, savage,
    With words that made them known. But thy vile race,
    Could not abide to be with; therefore wast thou
    To answer other business. Shrug'st thou, malice?
    What I command, I'll rack thee with old cramps,
    Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar,
  CALIBAN. No, pray thee.
            Come unto these yellow sands,
              And then take hands;
            Foot it featly here and there,
            And, sweet sprites, the burden bear.
    Weeping again the King my father's wreck,
    This music crept by me upon the waters,
    Allaying both their fury and my passion
    With its sweet air; thence I have follow'd it,
    Or it hath drawn me rather. But 'tis gone.
         Full fathom five thy father lies;
         Hark! now I hear them-Ding-dong bell.
  FERDINAND. The ditty does remember my drown'd father.
    That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.
    Was in the wreck; and but he's something stain'd
    As my soul prompts it. Spirit, fine spirit! I'll free thee
  FERDINAND. Most sure, the goddess
    On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my pray'r
    I am the best of them that speak this speech,
  PROSPERO. How? the best?
    What wert thou, if the King of Naples heard thee?
    To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me;
    The King my father wreck'd.
  FERDINAND. Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of Milan
    And his more braver daughter could control thee,
    If now 'twere fit to do't. At the first sight
    I'll set thee free for this.  [To FERDINAND]  A word, good
  MIRANDA. Why speaks my father so ungently? This
    Is the third man that e'er I saw; the first
    That e'er I sigh'd for. Pity move my father
    [Aside]  They are both in either's pow'rs; but this swift
    Make the prize light.  [To FERDINAND]  One word more; I
    charge thee
    From me, the lord on't.
    If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
    I'll manacle thy neck and feet together.
    The fresh-brook mussels, wither'd roots, and husks
    Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.
  MIRANDA. O dear father,
    For I can here disarm thee with this stick
  MIRANDA. Beseech you, father!
    Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What!
    Thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he,
    And they to him are angels.
    Are then most humble; I have no ambition
    Thy nerves are in their infancy again,
    And have no vigour in them.
  FERDINAND. So they are;
    My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
    My father's of a better nature, sir,
    As mountain winds; but then exactly do
Another part of the island
    The masters of some merchant, and the merchant,
    Have just our theme of woe; but for the miracle,
  ALONSO. Prithee, peace.
  SEBASTIAN. Look, he's winding up the watch of his wit; by
  ALONSO. I prithee, spare.
  ADRIAN. The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.
  SEBASTIAN. Of that there's none, or little.
  GONZALO. How lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!
  SEBASTIAN. No; he doth but mistake the truth totally.
  GONZALO. But the rarity of it is, which is indeed almost
  GONZALO. That our garments, being, as they were, drench'd
    in the sea, hold, notwithstanding, their freshness and
    glosses, being rather new-dy'd, than stain'd with salt
    we put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of the
    King's fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.
    to their queen.
  ANTONIO. His word is more than the miraculous harp.
  SEBASTIAN. He hath rais'd the wall, and houses too.
  ANTONIO. And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring
    as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage of
  ANTONIO. And the rarest that e'er came there.
  GONZALO. Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I
  ALONSO. You cram these words into mine ears against
    Married my daughter there; for, coming thence,
    Hath made his meal on thee?
    I saw him beat the surges under him,
    And ride upon their backs; he trod the water,
    'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oared
    But rather lose her to an African;
    Who hath cause to wet the grief on't.
  ALONSO. Prithee, peace.
  SEBASTIAN. You were kneel'd to, and importun'd otherwise
    By all of us; and the fair soul herself
    Moe widows in them of this business' making,
    Than we bring men to comfort them;
  ALONSO. So is the dear'st o' th' loss.
    And time to speak it in; you rub the sore,
    When you should bring the plaster.
  GONZALO. It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
  SEBASTIAN. Foul weather?
  GONZALO. And were the king on't, what would I do?
  ANTONIO. The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the
    T' excel the golden age.
  ALONSO. Prithee, no more; thou dost talk nothing to me.
    minister occasion to these gentlemen, who are of such
    sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh
  ANTONIO. What a blow was there given!
    lift the moon out of her sphere, if she would continue
  SEBASTIAN. We would so, and then go a-bat-fowling.
    Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts; I find
    Do not omit the heavy offer of it:
  SEBASTIAN. What a strange drowsiness possesses them!
  ANTONIO. It is the quality o' th' climate.
    Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find not
    They fell together all, as by consent;
    What thou shouldst be; th' occasion speaks thee; and
    Thou let'st thy fortune sleep-die rather; wink'st
    Trebles thee o'er.
    If you but knew how you the purpose cherish,
    Most often, do so near the bottom run
    By their own fear or sloth.
  SEBASTIAN. Prithee say on.
    A matter from thee; and a birth, indeed,
    Which throes thee much to yield.
    Professes to persuade-the King his son's alive,
    Another way so high a hope, that even
    But doubt discovery there. Will you grant with me
    Who's the next heir of Naples?
    Can have no note, unless the sun were post,
    'Tis true, my brother's daughter's Queen of Tunis;
    That now hath seiz'd them; why, they were no worse
    Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples
    You did supplant your brother Prospero.
    Much feater than before. My brother's servants
    Were then my fellows; now they are my men.
    That stand 'twixt me and Milan, candied be they
    And melt, ere they molest! Here lies your brother,
    No better than the earth he lies upon,
    To the perpetual wink for aye might put
    Should not upbraid our course. For all the rest,
    They'll tell the clock to any business that
    We say befits the hour.
    Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest;
    And I the King shall love thee.
  ANTONIO. Draw together;
    And when I rear my hand, do you the like,
  ARIEL. My master through his art foresees the danger
    For else his project dies-to keep them living.
    Preserve the King!                               [They wake]
  GONZALO. What's the matter?
    Like bulls, or rather lions; did't not wake you?
    To make an earthquake! Sure it was the roar
    I saw their weapons drawn-there was a noise,
  ALONSO. Lead off this ground; and let's make further
  GONZALO. Heavens keep him from these beasts!
Another part of the island
  CALIBAN. All the infections that the sun sucks up
    And yet I needs must curse. But they'll nor pinch,
    Nor lead me, like a firebrand, in the dark
    For every trifle are they set upon me;
    And after bite me; then like hedgehogs which
  TRINCULO. Here's neither bush nor shrub to bear off any
    weather at all, and another storm brewing; I hear it
    fish-like smell; kind of not-of-the-newest Poor-John. A
    had but this fish painted, not a holiday fool there but
    make a man; any strange beast there makes a man; when
    they will not give a doit to relieve a lame beggar, they
    thunderbolt.  [Thunder]  Alas, the storm is come again! My
    best way is to creep under his gaberdine; there is no
    other shelter hereabout. Misery acquaints a man with
    strange bed-fellows. I will here shroud till the dregs
    of the storm be past.
    The master, the swabber, the boatswain, and I,
    She lov'd not the savour of tar nor of pitch,
  STEPHANO. What's the matter? Have we devils here? Do you
    shall be said so again, while Stephano breathes at
  STEPHANO. This is some monster of the isle with four legs,
    who hath got, as I take it, an ague. Where the devil
    leather.
  CALIBAN. Do not torment me, prithee; I'll bring my wood
  STEPHANO. He's in his fit now, and does not talk after the
    I know it by thy trembling; now Prosper works upon thee.
    drown'd; and these are devils. O, defend me!
    to detract. If all the wine in my bottle will recover
    in thy other mouth.
  STEPHANO. Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy!
    the by the lesser legs; if any be Trinculo's legs, these
    are they. Thou art very Trinculo indeed! How cam'st thou
    to be the siege of this moon-calf? Can he vent
    not drown'd. Is the storm overblown? I hid me under the
    dead moon-calf's gaberdine for fear of the storm. And
  STEPHANO. Prithee, do not turn me about; my stomach is not
  CALIBAN.  [Aside]  These be fine things, an if they be not
  STEPHANO. How didst thou scape? How cam'st thou hither?
    Swear by this bottle how thou cam'st hither-I escap'd
    upon a butt of sack, which the sailors heaved o'erboard-
    by this bottle, which I made of the bark of a tree, with
    subject, for the liquor is not earthly.
  STEPHANO. Here; swear then how thou escap'dst.
  STEPHANO.  [Passing the bottle]  Here, kiss the book. Though
  STEPHANO. Out o' th' moon, I do assure thee; I was the Man
  CALIBAN. I have seen thee in her, and I do adore thee. My
    mistress show'd me thee, and thy dog and thy bush.
  STEPHANO. Come, swear to that; kiss the book. I will
  CALIBAN. I'll show thee every fertile inch o' th' island;
    and will kiss thy foot. I prithee be my god.
  STEPHANO. Come on, then; down, and swear.
  TRINCULO. But that the poor monster's in drink. An
  CALIBAN. I'll show thee the best springs; I'll pluck thee
    I'll fish for thee, and get thee wood enough.
    A plague upon the tyrant that I serve!
    I'll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,
  CALIBAN. I prithee let me bring thee where crabs grow;
    And I with my long nails will dig thee pig-nuts;
    Show thee a jay's nest, and instruct thee how
    To snare the nimble marmoset; I'll bring thee
    To clust'ring filberts, and sometimes I'll get thee
    Young scamels from the rock. Wilt thou go with me?
  STEPHANO. I prithee now, lead the way without any more
    talking. Trinculo, the King and all our company else
  STEPHANO. O brave monster! Lead the way.                Exeunt
  FERDINAND. There be some sports are painful, and their
    Delight in them sets off; some kinds of baseness
    Ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed;
    Some thousands of these logs, and pile them up,
    But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours,
    Work not so hard; I would the lightning had
    'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father
    He's safe for these three hours.
    I'll bear your logs the while; pray give me that;
    I'll carry it to the pile.
    I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,
  MIRANDA. Miranda-O my father,
    What's dearest to the world! Full many a lady
    Th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
    Did quarrel with the noblest grace she ow'd,
    And put it to the foil; but you, O you,
    And my dear father. How features are abroad,
    Any companion in the world but you;
    Something too wildly, and my father's precepts
    I therein do forget.
    My heart fly to your service; there resides
    And all the more it seeks to hide itself,
    Whether you will or no.
  MIRANDA. My husband, then?
  PROSPERO. So glad of this as they I cannot be,
Another part of the island
  STEPHANO. Tell not me-when the butt is out we will drink
    water, not a drop before; therefore bear up, and board
    say there's but five upon this isle: we are three of
    them; if th' other two be brain'd like us, the state
  STEPHANO. Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee; thy
  TRINCULO. Where should they be set else? He were a brave
    monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.
    sack. For my part, the sea cannot drown me; I swam, ere
    I could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues, off
  TRINCULO. Nor go neither; but you'll lie like dogs, and
    yet say nothing neither.
    was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack
  CALIBAN. Lo, lo again! Bite him to death, I prithee.
    you prove a mutineer-the next tree! The poor monster's
    hearken once again to the suit I made to thee?
  CALIBAN. As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant,
    sorcerer, that by his cunning hath cheated me of the
    I would my valiant master would destroy thee.
  STEPHANO. Mum, then, and no more. Proceed.
  CALIBAN. Thou shalt be lord of it, and I'll serve thee.
    bring me to the party?
  CALIBAN. Yea, yea, my lord; I'll yield him thee asleep,
    Where the quick freshes are.
  STEPHANO. Trinculo, run into no further danger; interrupt
    the monster one word further and, by this hand, I'll turn
    my mercy out o' doors, and make a stock-fish of thee.
  TRINCULO. Why, what did I? I did nothing. I'll go farther
    this, give me the lie another time.
  TRINCULO. I did not give the lie. Out o' your wits and
    drinking do. A murrain on your monster, and the devil
  STEPHANO. Now, forward with your tale.-Prithee stand
    further off.
  STEPHANO. Stand farther. Come, proceed.
  CALIBAN. Why, as I told thee, 'tis a custom with him
    I' th' afternoon to sleep; there thou mayst brain him,
    First to possess his books; for without them
    One spirit to command; they all do hate him
    He has brave utensils-for so he calls them-
    And bring thee forth brave brood.
    and thyself shall be viceroys. Dost thou like the plot,
  STEPHANO. Give me thy hand; I am sorry I beat thee; but
    Wilt thou destroy him then?
    Let us be jocund; will you troll the catch
  CALIBAN. That's not the tune.
                      [ARIEL plays the tune on a tabor and pipe]
  TRINCULO. This is the tune of our catch, play'd by the
  STEPHANO. He that dies pays all debts. I defy thee. Mercy
    That, if I then had wak'd after long sleep,
    Will make me sleep again; and then, in dreaming,
  STEPHANO. That shall be by and by; I remember the story.
Another part of the island
  GONZALO. By'r lakin, I can go no further, sir;
  ALONSO. Old lord, I cannot blame thee,
    Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks
    Do not, for one repulse, forgo the purpose
    For, now they are oppress'd with travel, they
    As when they are fresh.
           Solemn and strange music; and PROSPERO on the
           gentle actions of salutations; and inviting the
           KING, etc., to eat, they depart
  ALONSO. Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?
    That there are unicorns; that in Arabia
    There is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix
    At this hour reigning-there.
    I should report this now, would they believe me?
    For certes these are people of the island,
    Who though they are of monstrous shape yet, note,
    Thou hast said well; for some of you there present
    Although they want the use of tongue, a kind
    They have left their viands behind; for we have stomachs.
    Who would believe that there were mountaineers,
    Wallets of flesh? or that there were such men
    Whose heads stood in their breasts? which now we find
    The best is past. Brother, my lord the Duke,
       claps his wings upon the table; and, with a quaint
                device, the banquet vanishes
    And what is in't, the never-surfeited sea
                     [ALONSO, SEBASTIAN etc., draw their swords]
    Are ministers of Fate; the elements
    Wound the loud winds, or with bemock'd-at stabs
    Kill the still-closing waters, as diminish
    Expos'd unto the sea, which hath requit it,
    Incens'd the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures,
        He vanishes in thunder; then, to soft music, enter
        the SHAPES again, and dance, with mocks and mows,
                and carrying out the table
  PROSPERO. Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou
    And these mine enemies are all knit up
    In their distractions. They now are in my pow'r;
    And in these fits I leave them, while I visit
    Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drown'd,
    Methought the billows spoke, and told me of it;
    The winds did sing it to me; and the thunder,
    And with him there lie mudded.                          Exit
    I'll fight their legions o'er.
  GONZALO. All three of them are desperate; their great guilt,
    Now gins to bite the spirits. I do beseech you,
    That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly,
    And hinder them from what this ecstasy
    May now provoke them to.
    Hast strangely stood the test; here, afore heaven,
    No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall
    With such love as 'tis now, the murkiest den,
    The most opportune place, the strong'st suggestion
    Sit, then, and talk with her; she is thine own.
    In such another trick. Go bring the rabble,
    O'er whom I give thee pow'r, here to this place.
    Incite them to quick motion; for I must
    Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple
    And they expect it from me.
    And breathe twice, and cry 'so, so,'
    Too much the rein; the strongest oaths are straw
    Abates the ardour of my liver.
    Rather than want a spirit; appear, and pertly.
    And flat meads thatch'd with stover, them to keep;
    Whose shadow the dismissed bachelor loves,
    Where thou thyself dost air-the Queen o' th' sky,
    Bids thee leave these; and with her sovereign grace,
    Dost disobey the wife of Jupiter;
    Summon'd me hither to this short-grass'd green?
    On the blest lovers.
    Do now attend the Queen? Since they did plot
    Cutting the clouds towards Paphos, and her son
    Dove-drawn with her. Here thought they to have done
    To bless this twain, that they may prosperous be,
    And honour'd in their issue.                     [They sing]
    Spring come to you at the farthest,
    In the very end of harvest!
    To think these spirits?
    I have from their confines call'd to enact
    So rare a wond'red father and a wise
  IRIS. You nymphs, call'd Naiads, of the wind'ring brooks,
    Come hither from the furrow, and be merry;
    And these fresh nymphs encounter every one
        Enter certain REAPERS, properly habited; they join
         with the NYMPHS in a graceful dance; towards the
                  noise, they heavily vanish
    Of the beast Caliban and his confederates
    Against my life; the minute of their plot
    Is almost come.  [To the SPIRITS]  Well done; avoid; no
  FERDINAND. This is strange; your father's in some passion
    And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
    The cloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous palaces,
    The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
    And there repose; a turn or two I'll walk
  PROSPERO. Come, with a thought. I thank thee, Ariel; come.
    I thought to have told thee of it; but I fear'd
    Lest I might anger thee.
  PROSPERO. Say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?
  ARIEL. I told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking;
    So full of valour that they smote the air
    For breathing in their faces; beat the ground
    For kissing of their feet; yet always bending
    Towards their project. Then I beat my tabor,
    At which like unback'd colts they prick'd their ears,
    Advanc'd their eyelids, lifted up their noses
    As they smelt music; so I charm'd their cars,
    That calf-like they my lowing follow'd through
    Which ent'red their frail shins. At last I left them
    There dancing up to th' chins, that the foul lake
    O'erstunk their feet.
    The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither
    For stale to catch these thieves.
    So his mind cankers. I will plague them all,
    Come, hang them on this line.
  CALIBAN. Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not
    fairy, has done little better than play'd the Jack with us.
    Be patient, for the prize I'll bring thee to
    Shall hoodwink this mischance; therefore speak softly.
  TRINCULO. Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool!
  CALIBAN. Prithee, my king, be quiet. Seest thou here,
    This is the mouth o' th' cell; no noise, and enter.
    Look what a wardrobe here is for thee!
    And do the murder first. If he awake,
    this my jerkin? Now is the jerkin under the line; now,
  STEPHANO. I thank thee for that jest; here's a garment
    pass of pate; there's another garmet for't.
    and away with the rest.
             shape of dogs and hounds, bunting them about;
                   PROSPERO and ARIEL setting them on
  ARIEL. Silver! there it goes, Silver!
  PROSPERO. Fury, Fury! There, Tyrant, there! Hark, hark!
    Go charge my goblins that they grind their joints
    With dry convulsions, shorten up their sinews
    With aged cramps, and more pinch-spotted make them
  ARIEL. Hark, they roar.
  PROSPERO. Let them be hunted soundly. At this hour
    Shalt have the air at freedom; for a little
  PROSPERO. Now does my project gather to a head;
    Goes upright with his carriage. How's the day?
  ARIEL. On the sixth hour; at which time, my lord,
    When first I rais'd the tempest. Say, my spirit,
    How fares the King and 's followers?
  ARIEL. Confin'd together
    In the same fashion as you gave in charge;
    Just as you left them; all prisoners, sir,
    In the line-grove which weather-fends your cell;
    His brother, and yours, abide all three distracted,
    And the remainder mourning over them,
    Him you term'd, sir, 'the good old lord, Gonzalo';
    That if you now beheld them your affections
    Of their afflictions, and shall not myself,
    One of their kind, that relish all as sharply,
    Passion as they, be kindlier mov'd than thou art?
    Though with their high wrongs I am struck to th' quick,
    Do I take part; the rarer action is
    In virtue than in vengeance; they being penitent,
    Not a frown further. Go release them, Ariel;
    My charms I'll break, their senses I'll restore,
    And they shall be themselves.
  ARIEL. I'll fetch them, sir.                              Exit
    And ye that on the sands with printless foot
    Do chase the ebbing Neptune, and do fly him
    By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make,
    Whereof the ewe not bites; and you whose pastime
    To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid-
    The noontide sun, call'd forth the mutinous winds,
    And 'twixt the green sea and the azur'd vault
    Set roaring war. To the dread rattling thunder
    With his own bolt; the strong-bas'd promontory
    Have I made shake, and by the spurs pluck'd up
    Have wak'd their sleepers, op'd, and let 'em forth,
    To work mine end upon their senses that
    Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,
            Here enters ARIEL before; then ALONSO, with
           and FRANCISCO. They all enter the circle which
          PROSPERO had made, and there stand charm'd; which
    A solemn air, and the best comforter
    Mine eyes, ev'n sociable to the show of thine,
    And as the morning steals upon the night,
    Melting the darkness, so their rising senses
    Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle
    Thy brother was a furtherer in the act.
    You, brother mine, that entertain'd ambition,
    Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong-
    Would here have kill'd your king, I do forgive thee,
    Begins to swell, and the approaching tide
    Will shortly fill the reasonable shore
    That now lies foul and muddy. Not one of them
    Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell;           Exit ARIEL
    Where the bee sucks, there suck I;
    On the bat's back I do fly
    Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
  PROSPERO. Why, that's my dainty Ariel! I shall miss thee;
    To the King's ship, invisible as thou art;
    There shalt thou find the mariners asleep
    Under the hatches; the master and the boatswain
    Being awake, enforce them to this place;
    And presently, I prithee.
  ARIEL. I drink the air before me, and return
    Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body;
    And to thee and thy company I bid
    Beats, as of flesh and blood; and, since I saw thee,
  GONZALO. Whether this be
    For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother
    Thy rankest fault-all of them; and require
    My dukedom of thee, which perforce I know
    How sharp the point of this remembrance is!-
  ALONSO. Irreparable is the loss; and patience
  PROSPERO. I rather think
    For the like loss I have her sovereign aid,
  ALONSO. You the like loss!
    To make the dear loss, have I means much weaker
    O heavens, that they were living both in Naples,
    The King and Queen there! That they were, I wish
  PROSPERO. In this last tempest. I perceive these lords
    That they devour their reason, and scarce think
    Their eyes do offices of truth, their words
    To be the lord on't. No more yet of this;
    I would not for the world.
    A vision of the island, one dear son
  FERDINAND. Though the seas threaten, they are merciful;
    I have curs'd them without cause.                   [Kneels]
  ALONSO. Now all the blessings
    Of a glad father compass thee about!
    How many goodly creatures are there here!
  PROSPERO. 'Tis new to thee.
    Is she the goddess that hath sever'd us,
    And brought us thus together?
    I chose her when I could not ask my father
    Receiv'd a second life; and second father
    For it is you that have chalk'd forth the way
    Which brought us hither.
    And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife
           Re-enter ARIEL, with the MASTER and BOATSWAIN
    Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?
    Our King and company; the next, our ship-
  ALONSO. These are not natural events; they strengthen
    From strange to stranger. Say, how came you hither?
    Even in a dream, were we divided from them,
    And were brought moping hither.
    And there is in this business more than nature
    hither, spirit;
    Untie the spell.  [Exit ARIEL]  How fares my gracious sir?
  TRINCULO, in their stolen apparel
  STEPHANO. Every man shift for all the rest, and let no man
  TRINCULO. If these be true spies which I wear in my head,
  CALIBAN. O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed!
    What things are these, my lord Antonio?
  ANTONIO. Very like; one of them
  PROSPERO. Mark but the badges of these men, my lords,
    Then say if they be true. This mis-shapen knave-
    His mother was a witch, and one so strong
    That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs,
    For he's a bastard one-had plotted with them
    To take my life. Two of these fellows you
  ALONSO. And Trinculo is reeling ripe; where should they
  PROSPERO. You'd be king o' the isle, sirrah?
  STEPHANO. I should have been a sore one, then.
  SEBASTIAN. Or stole it, rather.
    Go quick away-the story of my life,
    And the particular accidents gone by
    Since I came to this isle. And in the morn
    Where I have hope to see the nuptial
    Of these our dear-belov'd solemnized,
    And thence retire me to my Milan, where
    To hear the story of your life, which must
    Take the ear strangely.
    That is thy charge. Then to the elements
          And pardon'd the deceiver, dwell
          With the help of your good hands.
    TIMON of Athens
    ALCIBIADES, an Athenian captain
      in the Masque
Athens and the neighbouring woods
Athens. TIMON'S house
  POET. I have not seen you long; how goes the world?
    Magic of bounty, all these spirits thy power
    Hath conjur'd to attend! I know the merchant.
  PAINTER. I know them both; th' other's a jeweller.
  MERCHANT. O, pray let's see't. For the Lord Timon, sir?
  JEWELLER. If he will touch the estimate. But for that-
  POET. When we for recompense have prais'd the vile,
    It stains the glory in that happy verse
    Which aptly sings the good.
  MERCHANT. [Looking at the jewel] 'Tis a good form.
    To the great lord.
    Provokes itself, and like the current flies
    Each bound it chafes. What have you there?
  POET. Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.
    Moves in this lip! To th' dumbness of the gesture
  PAINTER. It is a pretty mocking of the life.
    Lives in these touches, livelier than life.
  POET. The senators of Athens- happy man!
    Infects one comma in the course I hold,
    All sorts of hearts; yea, from the glass-fac'd flatterer
  PAINTER. I saw them speak together.
    That labour on the bosom of this sphere
    To propagate their states. Amongst them all
    With one man beckon'd from the rest below,
    Bowing his head against the steepy mount
    Some better than his value- on the moment
    Drink the free air.
  PAINTER. Ay, marry, what of these?
    Which labour'd after him to the mountain's top
    Even on their knees and hands, let him slip down,
    That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortune's
    The foot above the head.
         VENTIDIUS talking with him; LUCILIUS and other
    I am not of that feather to shake of
    Which he shall have. I'll pay the debt, and free him.
    'Tis not enough to help the feeble up,
  TIMON. Freely, good father.
  OLD ATHENIAN. Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.
  TIMON. Well; what further?
    In qualities of the best. This man of thine
    Attempts her love; I prithee, noble lord,
  TIMON. Love you the maid?
    I call the gods to witness I will choose
    Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world,
  OLD ATHENIAN. Three talents on the present; in future, all.
  TIMON. My hand to thee; mine honour on my promise.
    Go not away. What have you there, my friend?
    The painting is almost the natural man;
    He is but outside; these pencill'd figures are
    Even such as they give out. I like your work,
    Till you hear further from me.
    We must needs dine together. Sir, your jewel
    Things of like value, differing in the owners,
    Are prized by their masters. Believe't, dear lord,
    You mend the jewel by the wearing it.
  MERCHANT. No, my good lord; he speaks the common tongue,
  TIMON. Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus!
    When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.
  TIMON. Why dost thou call them knaves? Thou know'st them not.
  APEMANTUS. Are they not Athenians?
  APEMANTUS. Thou know'st I do; I call'd thee by thy name.
  TIMON. Whither art going?
  APEMANTUS. To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.
  APEMANTUS. The best, for the innocence.
  APEMANTUS. He wrought better that made the painter; and yet he's
  APEMANTUS. Thy mother's of my generation; what's she, if I be a dog?
  APEMANTUS. O, they eat lords; so they come by great bellies.
  APEMANTUS. Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thy
  TIMON. What wouldst do then, Apemantus?
  APEMANTUS. Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!
  MERCHANT. If traffic do it, the gods do it.
  APEMANTUS. Traffic's thy god, and thy god confound thee!
  TIMON. Pray entertain them; give them guide to us.
                Enter ALCIBIADES, with the rest
  APEMANTUS. So, so, there!
    That there should be small love amongst these sweet knaves,
  SECOND LORD. Fare thee well, fare thee well.
    thee none.
  SECOND LORD. Away, unpeaceable dog, or I'll spurn thee hence.
  APEMANTUS. I will fly, like a dog, the heels o' th' ass.  Exit
  SECOND LORD. He pours it out: Plutus, the god of gold,
    But breeds the giver a return exceeding
FLAVIUS and others attending; and then enter LORD TIMON, the states,
the ATHENIAN LORDS, VENTIDIUS, which TIMON redeem'd from prison.
    It hath pleas'd the gods to remember my father's age,
    I gave it freely ever; and there's none
    To imitate them: faults that are rich are fair.
    But where there is true friendship there needs none.
    I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.
  TIMON. Fie, th'art a churl; ye have got a humour there
    angry. Go, let him have a table by himself; for he does neither
    I come to observe; I give thee warning on't.
  TIMON. I take no heed of thee. Th'art an Athenian, therefore
    welcome. I myself would have no power; prithee let my meat make
    thee silent.
    flatter thee. O you gods, what a number of men eats Timon, and he
    sees 'em not! It grieves me to see so many dip their meat in one
    man's blood; and all the madness is, he cheers them up too.
    I wonder men dare trust themselves with men.
    Methinks they should invite them without knives:
    Good for their meat and safer for their lives.
    There's much example for't; the fellow that sits next him now,
    parts bread with him, pledges the breath of him in a divided
    draught, is the readiest man to kill him. 'T has been proved. If
    Lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes:
    Great men should drink with harness on their throats.
  TIMON. My lord, in heart! and let the health go round.
    Those healths will make thee and thy state look ill, Timon.
    This and my food are equals; there's no odds.'
    Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.
  TIMON. Captain Alcibiades, your heart's in the field now.
  TIMON. You had rather be at a breakfast of enemies than dinner of
  ALCIBIADES. So they were bleeding new, my lord, there's no meat
  APEMANTUS. Would all those flatterers were thine enemies then, that
    then thou mightst kill 'em, and bid me to 'em.
  TIMON. O, no doubt, my good friends, but the gods themselves have
    They were the most needless creatures living, should we ne'er
    up in cases, that keep their sounds to themselves. Why, I have
    our own than the riches of our friends? O, what a precious
    comfort 'tis to have so many like brothers commanding one
    another's fortunes! O, joy's e'en made away ere't can be born!
    Mine eyes cannot hold out water, methinks. To forget their
  APEMANTUS. Thou weep'st to make them drink, Timon.
  SECOND LORD. Joy had the like conception in our eyes,
  SERVANT. Please you, my lord, there are certain ladies most
  TIMON. Ladies! What are their wills?
  SERVANT. There comes with them a forerunner, my lord, which bears
    that office to signify their pleasures.
  TIMON. I pray let them be admitted.
  CUPID. Hail to thee, worthy Timon, and to all
    Acknowledge thee their patron, and come freely
    Music, make their welcome.                        Exit CUPID
          with lutes in their hands, dancing and playing
    Like madness is the glory of this life,
    Who dies that bears not one spurn to their graves
    Of their friends' gift?
    Men shut their doors against a setting sun.
        TIMON; and to show their loves, each single out an
            strain or two to the hautboys, and cease
  FIRST LADY. My lord, you take us even at the best.
  APEMANTUS. Faith, for the worst is filthy, and would not hold
  TIMON. Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you;
  TIMON. The little casket bring me hither.
    When all's spent, he'd be cross'd then, an he could.
               Re-enter FLAVIUS, with the casket
  SERVANT. My lord, there are certain nobles of the Senate newly
  TIMON. Near! Why then, another time I'll hear thee. I prithee let's
    be provided to show them entertainment.
                     Enter another SERVANT
  TIMON. I shall accept them fairly. Let the presents
  TIMON. I'll hunt with him; and let them be receiv'd,
    Pays interest for't; his land's put to their books.
  THIRD LORD. O, he's the very soul of bounty!
  TIMON. And now I remember, my lord, you gave good words the other
    Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich.
    It comes in charity to thee; for all thy living
    Is 'mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast
    I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums
    Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on curtsies.
    I would be good to thee.
  APEMANTUS. No, I'll nothing; for if I should be brib'd too, there
    would be none left to rail upon thee, and then thou wouldst sin
    the faster. Thou giv'st so long, Timon, I fear me thou wilt give
    away thyself in paper shortly. What needs these feasts, pomps,
  APEMANTUS. So. Thou wilt not hear me now: thou shalt not then. I'll
    lock thy heaven from thee.
    And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold.
    But rather one that smiles and still invites
    With slight denial, nor then silenc'd when
    'Commend me to your master' and the cap
    Plays in the right hand, thus; but tell him
    When every feather sticks in his own wing,
  SENATOR. Take the bonds along with you,
    And have the dates in compt.
    That he will neither know how to maintain it
       Enter CAPHIS, and the SERVANTS Of ISIDORE and VARRO
  CAPHIS. Here comes the lord.
  CAPHIS. Of Athens here, my lord.
    To the succession of new days this month.
    That with your other noble parts you'll suit
    I prithee but repair to me next morning.
    [To FLAVIUS] Come hither. Pray you,
    How goes the world that I am thus encount'red
    And the detention of long-since-due debts,
    See them well entertain'd.                              Exit
  CAPHIS. Stay, stay, here comes the fool with Apemantus.
  VARRO'S SERVANT. I speak not to thee.
  APEMANTUS. No, 'tis to thyself. [To the FOOL] Come away.
  ISIDORE'S SERVANT. [To VARRO'S SERVANT] There's the fool hangs on
  CAPHIS. Where's the fool now?
  APEMANTUS. He last ask'd the question. Poor rogues and usurers'
  PAGE. [To the FOOL] Why, how now, Captain? What do you in this wise
  APEMANTUS. Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might answer thee
  PAGE. Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription of these
  APEMANTUS. There will little learning die, then, that day thou art
  FOOL. Will you leave me there?
  ALL SERVANTS. Ay; would they serv'd us!
    masters, they approach sadly and go away merry; but they enter my
  APEMANTUS. Do it then, that we may account thee a whoremaster and a
  FOOL. A fool in good clothes, and something like thee. 'Tis a
  VARRO'S SERVANT. Thou art not altogether a fool.
  FOOL. Nor thou altogether a wise man.
  FOOL. I do not always follow lover, elder brother, and woman;
    sometime the philosopher.
    Laid them before you; you would throw them off
    And say you found them in mine honesty.
    Prompted you in the ebb of your estate
    And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
    What shall defend the interim? And at length
  FLAVIUS. O my good lord, the world is but a word;
    And set me on the proof. So the gods bless me,
  TIMON. Prithee no more.
  FLAVIUS. 'Heavens,' have I said 'the bounty of this lord!
    Ah! when the means are gone that buy this praise,
  TIMON. Come, sermon me no further.
    Why dost thou weep? Canst thou the conscience lack
    If I would broach the vessels of my love,
    And try the argument of hearts by borrowing,
    As I can bid thee speak.
  TIMON. And, in some sort, these wants of mine are crown'd
    That I account them blessings; for by these
    Within there! Flaminius! Servilius!
           Enter FLAMINIUS, SERVILIUS, and another SERVANT
    Commend me to their loves; and I am proud, say, that my occasions
    have found time to use 'em toward a supply of money. Let the
  TIMON. Go you, sir, to the senators,
    Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have
    For that I knew it the most general way,
    To them to use your signet and your name;
    But they do shake their heads, and I am here
    That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot
    Do what they would, are sorry- you are honourable-
    But yet they could have wish'd- they know not-
    And so, intending other serious matters,
    After distasteful looks, and these hard fractions,
  TIMON. You gods, reward them!
    Prithee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows
    Have their ingratitude in them hereditary.
    'Tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind;
    Is fashion'd for the journey dull and heavy.
    Go to Ventidius. Prithee be not sad,
    No blame belongs to thee. Ventidius lately
    Buried his father, by whose death he's stepp'd
    With those five talents. That had, give't these fellows
    Being free itself, it thinks all others so.           Exeunt
    honourable, complete, freehearted gentleman of Athens, thy very
    hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty Flaminius?
    assistance therein.
  SERVANT. Please your lordship, here is the wine.
  LUCULLUS. Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise. Here's to thee.
  LUCULLUS. I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt spirit,
    give thee thy due, and one that knows what belongs to reason, and
    canst use the time well, if the time use thee well. Good parts in
    thee. [To SERVANT] Get you gone, sirrah. [Exit SERVANT] Draw
    friendship without security. Here's three solidares for thee.
    Good boy, wink at me, and say thou saw'st me not. Fare thee well.
  FLAMINIUS. Is't possible the world should so much differ,
    To him that worships thee.         [Throwing the money back]
  FLAMINIUS. May these add to the number that may scald thee!
  LUCIUS. Who, the Lord Timon? He is my very good friend, and an
     one of his men was with the Lord Lucullus to borrow so many
  LUCIUS. What a strange case was that! Now, before the gods, I am
  LUCIUS. Servilius? You are kindly met, sir. Fare thee well; commend
  SERVILIUS. But in the mean time he wants less, my lord.
    unluckily it happ'ned that I should purchase the day before for a
    before the gods, I am not able to do- the more beast, I say! I
    was sending to use Lord Timon myself, these gentlemen can
    witness; but I would not for the wealth of Athens I had done't
    honour will conceive the fairest of me, because I have no power
  FIRST STRANGER. Why, this is the world's soul; and just of the same
    That dips in the same dish? For, in my knowing,
    Timon has been this lord's father,
    Has paid his men their wages. He ne'er drinks
    And yet- O, see the monstrousness of man
    And the best half should have return'd to him,
  SEMPRONIUS. Must he needs trouble me in't? Hum! 'Bove all others?
    Whom he redeem'd from prison. All these
    Owe their estates unto him.
  SEMPRONIUS. How! Have they denied him?
    For, in my conscience, I was the first man
    I'd rather than the worth of thrice the sum
    And with their faint reply this answer join:
    by't; and I cannot think but, in the end, the villainies of man
    Save only the gods. Now his friends are dead,
    Doors that were ne'er acquainted with their wards
    Now to guard sure their master.
Enter two Of VARRO'S MEN, meeting LUCIUS' SERVANT, and others,
  HORTENSIUS. Lucius! What, do we meet together?
  TITUS. So is theirs and ours.
  LUCIUS' SERVANT. welcome, good brother, what do you think the hour?
  LUCIUS' SERVANT. Ay, but the days are wax'd shorter with him;
    Is like the sun's, but not like his recoverable.
  HORTENSIUS. I'm weary of this charge, the gods can witness;
    Why then preferr'd you not your sums and bills
    Then they could smile, and fawn upon his debts,
    And take down th' int'rest into their glutt'nous maws.
  SERVILIUS. If I might beseech you, gentlemen, to repair some other
  LUCIUS' SERVANT. Many do keep their chambers are not sick;
    Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts,
    And make a clear way to the gods.
  TIMON. Knock me down with 'em; cleave me to the girdle.
  TIMON. Tear me, take me, and the gods fall upon you!      Exit
  HORTENSIUS. Faith, I perceive our masters may throw their caps at
    their money. These debts may well be call'd desperate ones, for a
  TIMON. They have e'en put my breath from me, the slaves.
    I'll once more feast the rascals.
    Go, I charge thee, invite them all; let in the tide
Enter three SENATORS at one door, ALCIBIADES meeting them, with attendants
  FIRST SENATOR. My lord, you have my voice to't: the fault's bloody.
  SECOND SENATOR. Most true; the law shall bruise him.
  ALCIBIADES. Honour, health, and compassion, to the Senate!
    For pity is the virtue of the law,
    Hath stepp'd into the law, which is past depth
    Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice-
    Your words have took such pains as if they labour'd
    Quarrelling upon the head of valour; which, indeed,
    Is valour misbegot, and came into the world
    The worst that man can breathe,
    To wear them like his raiment, carelessly,
  ALCIBIADES. My lords, then, under favour, pardon me
    Why do fond men expose themselves to battle,
    And let the foes quietly cut their throats,
    Without repugnancy? If there be
    Such valour in the bearing, what make we
    Abroad? Why, then, women are more valiant,
    And the ass more captain than the lion; the fellow
    Loaden with irons wiser than the judge,
    Weigh but the crime with this.
  SECOND SENATOR. You breathe in vain.
    In the last conflict, and made plenteous wounds!
    If there were no foes, that were enough
    If by this crime he owes the law his life,
    Why, let the war receive't in valiant gore;
    On height of our displeasure. Friend or brother,
    He forfeits his own blood that spills another.
    We banish thee for ever.
    That makes the Senate ugly.
  FIRST SENATOR. If after two days' shine Athens contain thee,
  ALCIBIADES. Now the gods keep you old enough that you may live
    I'm worse than mad; I have kept back their foes,
    While they have told their money and let out
    Is this the balsam that the usuring Senate
    That I may strike at Athens. I'll cheer up
    did but try us this other day.
    I hope it is not so low with him as he made it seem in the trial
  SECOND LORD. It should not be, by the persuasion of his new
    conjur'd me beyond them, and I must needs appear.
  FIRST LORD. Ever at the best, hearing well of your lordship.
    stay; feast your ears with the music awhile, if they will fare so
    when your lordship this other day sent to me, I was so
    brought in] Come, bring in all together.
  THIRD LORD. Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield it.
  FIRST LORD. How do you? What's the news?
  SECOND LORD. This is the old man still.
  TIMON. Each man to his stool with that spur as he would to the lip
    a city feast of it, to let the meat cool ere we can agree upon
    the first place. Sit, sit. The gods require our thanks:
    that one need not lend to another; for were your god-heads to
    borrow of men, men would forsake the gods. Make the meat be
    beloved more than the man that gives it. Let no assembly of
    twenty be without a score of villains. If there sit twelve women
    at the table, let a dozen of them be- as they are. The rest of
    your foes, O gods, the senators of Athens, together with the
    common lag of people, what is amiss in them, you gods, make
    suitable for destruction. For these my present friends, as they
    are to me nothing, so in nothing bless them, and to nothing are
    they welcome.
                             [Throwing the water in their faces]
    Of man and beast the infinite malady
    Stay, I will lend thee money, borrow none.       [Throws the
                            dishes at them, and drives them out]
    Burn house! Sink Athens! Henceforth hated be
                           Re-enter the LORDS
  SECOND LORD. Know you the quality of Lord Timon's fury?
    He gave me a jewel th' other day, and now he has beat it out of
Without the walls of Athens
  TIMON. Let me look back upon thee. O thou wall
    That girdles in those wolves, dive in the earth
    And fence not Athens! Matrons, turn incontinent.
    Pluck the grave wrinkled Senate from the bench
    And minister in their steads. To general filths
    Rather than render back, out with your knives
    Thy mistress is o' th' brothel. Son of sixteen,
    Pluck the lin'd crutch from thy old limping sire,
    Religion to the gods, peace, justice, truth,
    On Athens, ripe for stroke. Thou cold sciatica,
    Cripple our senators, that their limbs may halt
    As lamely as their manners. Lust and liberty,
    Creep in the minds and marrows of our youth,
    That 'gainst the stream of virtue they may strive
    And drown themselves in riot. Itches, blains,
    Sow all th' Athenian bosoms, and their crop
    That their society, as their friendship, may
    Be merely poison! Nothing I'll bear from thee
    Timon will to the woods, where he shall find
    The Athenians both within and out that wall!
    To the whole race of mankind, high and low!
Athens. TIMON's house
    Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,
    One friend to take his fortune by the arm
    Slink all away; leave their false vows with him,
    A dedicated beggar to the air,
                     Enter other SERVANTS
    And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck,
    Hearing the surges threat. We must all part
                                             [Giving them money]
    O the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us!
    Who then dares to be half so kind again?
The woods near the sea-shore. Before TIMON'S cave
Enter TIMON in the woods
  TIMON. O blessed breeding sun, draw from the earth
    Infect the air! Twinn'd brothers of one womb-
    Scarce is dividant- touch them with several fortunes:
    The greater scorns the lesser. Not nature,
    It is the pasture lards the rother's sides,
    So are they all; for every grise of fortune
    Ducks to the golden fool. All's oblique;
    Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate
    Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads-
    Make the hoar leprosy ador'd, place thieves
    And give them title, knee, and approbation,
    With senators on the bench. This is it
    That makes the wappen'd widow wed again-
    She whom the spital-house and ulcerous sores
    Would cast the gorge at this embalms and spices
    Among the rout of nations, I will make thee
    But yet I'll bury thee. Thou't go, strong thief,
    When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.
  ALCIBIADES. What art thou there? Speak.
    For showing me again the eyes of man!
  ALCIBIADES. What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee
    That I might love thee something.
  ALCIBIADES. I know thee well;
  TIMON. I know thee too; and more than that I know thee
    With man's blood paint the ground, gules, gules.
  TIMON. I will not kiss thee; then the rot returns
  ALCIBIADES. How came the noble Timon to this change?
  TIMON. As the moon does, by wanting light to give.
    But then renew I could not, like the moon;
    What friendship may I do thee?
    promise, the gods plague thee, for thou art man! If thou dost
    perform, confound thee, for thou art a man!
  TIMON. Thou saw'st them when I had prosperity.
  ALCIBIADES. I see them now; then was a blessed time.
  TIMANDRA. Is this th' Athenian minion whom the world
  TIMON. Be a whore still; they love thee not that use thee.
    Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.
    Make use of thy salt hours. Season the slaves
    To the tub-fast and the diet.
  TIMANDRA. Hang thee, monster!
    How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth,
    But for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them-
  TIMON. I prithee beat thy drum and get thee gone.
  ALCIBIADES. I am thy friend, and pity thee, dear Timon.
    I had rather be alone.
  ALCIBIADES. Why, fare thee well;
    Here is some gold for thee.
  ALCIBIADES. When I have laid proud Athens on a heap-
  TIMON. War'st thou 'gainst Athens?
  TIMON. The gods confound them all in thy conquest;
    And thee after, when thou hast conquer'd!
    In the sick air; let not thy sword skip one.
    He is an usurer. Strike me the counterfeit matron:
    Herself's a bawd. Let not the virgin's cheek
    That through the window bars bore at men's eyes
    Are not within the leaf of pity writ,
    But set them down horrible traitors. Spare not the babe
    Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy;
    Think it a bastard whom the oracle
    Whose proof nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,
  ALCIBIADES. Hast thou gold yet? I'll take the gold thou givest me,
  TIMON. Dost thou, or dost thou not, heaven's curse upon thee!
    With burdens of the dead- some that were hang'd,
    No matter. Wear them, betray with them. Whore still;
  PHRYNIA AND TIMANDRA. Well, more gold. What then?
    In hollow bones of man; strike their sharp shins,
    And mar men's spurring. Crack the lawyer's voice,
    Nor sound his quillets shrilly. Hoar the flamen,
    That scolds against the quality of flesh
    And not believes himself. Down with the nose,
    Down with it flat, take the bridge quite away
    Smells from the general weal. Make curl'd-pate ruffians bald,
    And let the unscarr'd braggarts of the war
    Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
  ALCIBIADES. Strike up the drum towards Athens. Farewell, Timon;
    If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again.
  TIMON. If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.
  ALCIBIADES. I never did thee harm.
  TIMON. Men daily find it. Get thee away, and take
    Thy beagles with thee.
    Should yet be hungry! Common mother, thou,         [Digging]
    Engenders the black toad and adder blue,
    Hath to the marbled mansion all above
  APEMANTUS. I was directed hither. Men report
    Thou dost affect my manners and dost use them.
  TIMON. 'Tis, then, because thou dost not keep a dog,
    Whom I would imitate. Consumption catch thee!
  APEMANTUS. This is in thee a nature but infected,
    This slave-like habit and these looks of care?
    Hug their diseas'd perfumes, and have forgot
    That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods
    By putting on the cunning of a carper.
    By that which has undone thee: hinge thy knee,
  TIMON. Were I like thee, I'd throw away myself.
    That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,
    Will put thy shirt on warm? Will these moist trees,
    That have outliv'd the eagle, page thy heels
    And skip when thou point'st out? Will the cold brook,
    To cure thy o'ernight's surfeit? Call the creatures
    Whose naked natures live in all the spite
    To the conflicting elements expos'd,
    Answer mere nature- bid them flatter thee.
  TIMON. A fool of thee. Depart.
  APEMANTUS. I love thee better now than e'er I did.
  TIMON. I hate thee worse.
  APEMANTUS. To vex thee.
    The other, at high wish. Best state, contentless,
    Worse than the worst, content.
    To such as may the passive drugs of it
    The sug'red game before thee. But myself,
    Who had the world as my confectionary;
    The mouths, the tongues, the eyes, and hearts of men
    Do on the oak, have with one winter's brush
    Fell from their boughs, and left me open, bare
    Hath made thee hard in't. Why shouldst thou hate men?
    They never flatter'd thee. What hast thou given?
    If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,
    To some she-beggar and compounded thee
    If thou hadst not been born the worst of men,
  TIMON. Ay, that I am not thee.
    Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
    I'd give thee leave to hang it. Get thee gone.
    That the whole life of Athens were in this!
  APEMANTUS. What wouldst thou have to Athens?
  TIMON. Thee thither in a whirlwind. If thou wilt,
    Tell them there I have gold; look, so I have.
  APEMANTUS. Where my stomach. finds meat; or rather, where I eat it.
  APEMANTUS. The middle of humanity thou never knewest, but the
    perfume, they mock'd thee for too much curiosity; in thy rags
    thou know'st none, but art despis'd for the contrary. There's a
    medlar for thee; eat it.
  TIMON. Ay, though it look like thee.
  TIMON. I understand thee: thou hadst some means to keep a dog.
  APEMANTUS. What things in the world canst thou nearest compare to
  TIMON. Women nearest; but men, men are the things themselves. What
    wouldst thou do with the world, Apemantus, if it lay in thy
  APEMANTUS. Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.
  TIMON. Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion of men, and
    remain a beast with the beasts?
  TIMON. A beastly ambition, which the gods grant thee t' attain to!
    If thou wert the lion, the fox would beguile thee; if thou wert
    the lamb, the fox would eat thee; if thou wert the fox, the lion
    would suspect thee, when, peradventure, thou wert accus'd by the
    ass. If thou wert the ass, thy dulness would torment thee; and
    still thou liv'dst but as a breakfast to the wolf. If thou wert
    the wolf, thy greediness would afflict thee, and oft thou
    shouldst hazard thy life for thy dinner. Wert thou the unicorn,
    pride and wrath would confound thee, and make thine own self the
    the horse; wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seiz'd by the
    leopard; wert thou a leopard, thou wert german to the lion, and
    the spots of thy kindred were jurors on thy life. All thy safety
    mightst have hit upon it here. The commonwealth of Athens is
  TIMON. How has the ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the
    light upon thee! I will fear to catch it, and give way. When I
    know not what else to do, I'll see thee again.
  TIMON. When there is nothing living but thee, thou shalt be
    welcome. I had rather be a beggar's dog than Apemantus.
  APEMANTUS. Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.
  APEMANTUS. A plague on thee! thou art too bad to curse.
  TIMON. All villains that do stand by thee are pure.
  TIMON. If I name thee.
    I'll beat thee- but I should infect my hands.
  APEMANTUS. I would my tongue could rot them off!
    I swoon to see thee.
    A stone by thee.                     [Throws a stone at him]
    But even the mere necessities upon't.
    Lie where the light foam of the sea may beat
    That death in me at others' lives may laugh.
    [Looks at the gold] O thou sweet king-killer, and dear divorce
    Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow
    And mak'st them kiss! that speak'st with every tongue
    Set them into confounding odds, that beasts
    May have the world in empire!
  TIMON. Thy back, I prithee.
    things like men? Eat, Timon, and abhor them.
                       Enter the BANDITTI
    gold and the falling-from of his friends drove him into this
  THIRD BANDIT. Let us make the assay upon him; if he care not for't,
  BANDITTI. Save thee, Timon!
    Why should you want? Behold, the earth hath roots;
    The oaks bear mast, the briars scarlet hips;
  TIMON. Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds, and fishes;
    In holier shapes; for there is boundless theft
    Here's gold. Go, suck the subtle blood o' th' grape
    Till the high fever seethe your blood to froth,
    And so scape hanging. Trust not the physician;
    Moe than you rob. Take wealth and lives together;
    Robs the vast sea; the moon's an arrant thief,
    And her pale fire she snatches from the sun;
    The moon into salt tears; the earth's a thief,
    The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
    Has uncheck'd theft. Love not yourselves; away,
    Rob one another. There's more gold. Cut throats;
    All that you meet are thieves. To Athens go,
  FIRST BANDIT. 'Tis in the malice of mankind that he thus advises
  FIRST BANDIT. Let us first see peace in Athens. There is no time so
    What viler thing upon the earth than friends,
    Grant I may ever love, and rather woo
    Then, if thou grant'st th'art a man, I have forgot thee.
  TIMON. Then I know thee not.
  TIMON. What, dost thou weep? Come nearer. Then I love thee
    And thou redeem'st thyself. But all, save thee,
    Thou mightst have sooner got another service;
    Upon their first lord's neck. But tell me true,
    Either in hope or present, I'd exchange
  TIMON. Look thee, 'tis so! Thou singly honest man,
    Have sent thee treasure. Go, live rich and happy,
    But let the famish'd flesh slide from the bone
    Ere thou relieve the beggar. Give to dogs
    Debts wither 'em to nothing. Be men like blasted woods,
    And may diseases lick up their false bloods!
    Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.
  PAINTER. As I took note of the place, it cannot be far where he
  POET. to be thought of him? Does the rumour hold for true that he's
  PAINTER. Nothing else. You shall see him a palm in Athens again,
    and flourish with the highest. Therefore 'tis not amiss we tender
    they travail for, if it be just and true report that goes of his
  PAINTER. Good as the best. Promising is the very air o' th' time;
    it opens the eyes of expectation. Performance is ever the duller
    for his act, and but in the plainer and simpler kind of people
    the deed of saying is quite out of use. To promise is most
    must be a personating of himself; a satire against the softness
    of prosperity, with a discovery of the infinite flatteries that
    work? Wilt thou whip thine own faults in other men? Do so, I have
    gold for thee.
    When the day serves, before black-corner'd night,
  TIMON. [Aside] I'll meet you at the turn. What a god's gold,
    'Tis thou that rig'st the bark and plough'st the foam,
    To thee be worship! and thy saints for aye
    Be crown'd with plagues, that thee alone obey!
    Fit I meet them.                   [Advancing from his cave]
    Not all the whips of heaven are large enough-
    To their whole being! I am rapt, and cannot cover
  TIMON. Let it go naked: men may see't the better.
    Make them best seen and known.
    Have travail'd in the great show'r of your gifts,
  PAINTER. We are hither come to offer you our service.
  PAINTER. So it is said, my noble lord; but therefore
    Best in all Athens. Th'art indeed the best;
    Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you; neither wish I
    Rid me these villains from your companies.
    Hang them or stab them, drown them in a draught,
    Confound them by some course, and come to me,
  BOTH. Name them, my lord; let's know them.
    [To the PAINTER] If, where thou art, two villians shall not be,
    Come not near him. [To the POET] If thou wouldst not reside
    But where one villain is, then him abandon.-
    Hence, pack! there's gold; you came for gold, ye slaves.
    [To the PAINTER] You have work for me; there's payment; hence!
    [To the POET] You are an alchemist; make gold of that.-
    Out, rascal dogs!                [Beats and drives them out]
    It is our part and promise to th' Athenians
    Men are not still the same; 'twas time and griefs
    Offering the fortunes of his former days,
    Look out, and speak to friends. Th' Athenians
    By two of their most reverend Senate greet thee.
    Speak to them, noble Timon.
    Be as a cauterizing to the root o' th' tongue,
  FIRST SENATOR. The senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.
  TIMON. I thank them; and would send them back the plague,
    Could I but catch it for them.
    What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.
    Entreat thee back to Athens, who have thought
    Toward thee forgetfulness too general, gross;
    Which now the public body, which doth seldom
    Play the recanter, feeling in itself
    And send forth us to make their sorrowed render,
    Together with a recompense more fruitful
    Than their offence can weigh down by the dram;
    As shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs
    And write in thee the figures of their love,
    Ever to read them thine.
    Surprise me to the very brink of tears.
    And I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.
  FIRST SENATOR. Therefore so please thee to return with us,
    And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take
    Against the walls of Athens.
    That Timon cares not. But if he sack fair Athens,
    Giving our holy virgins to the stain
    And let him take't at worst; for their knives care not,
    The reverend'st throat in Athens. So I leave you
    To the protection of the prosperous gods,
    One that rejoices in the common wreck,
  FIRST SENATOR. These words become your lips as they pass through
    them.
    In their applauding gates.
  TIMON. Commend me to them,
    And tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,
    Their fears of hostile strokes, their aches, losses,
    Their pangs of love, with other incident throes
    In life's uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do them-
    I'll teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades' wrath.
    Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree
    Come hither, ere my tree hath felt the axe,
  FLAVIUS. Trouble him no further; thus you still shall find him.
  TIMON. Come not to me again; but say to Athens
    Upon the beached verge of the salt flood,
    The turbulent surge shall cover. Thither come,
    Graves only be men's works and death their gain!
    And strain what other means is left unto us
Before the walls of Athens
Enter two other SENATORS with a MESSENGER
  MESSENGER. I have spoke the least.
  SECOND SENATOR. We stand much hazard if they bring not Timon.
               Enter the other SENATORS, from TIMON
  FIRST SENATOR. Here come our brothers.
    Doth choke the air with dust. In, and prepare.
    Ours is the fall, I fear; our foes the snare.         Exeunt
Enter a SOLDIER in the woods, seeking TIMON
  SOLDIER. By all description this should be the place.
    I cannot read; the character I'll take with wax.
    Before proud Athens he's set down by this,
    Whose fall the mark of his ambition is.                 Exit
Before the walls of Athens
Trumpets sound. Enter ALCIBIADES with his powers before Athens
       Sound a parley. The SENATORS appear upon the walls
    Till now you have gone on and fill'd the time
    As slept within the shadow of your power,
    Our sufferance vainly. Now the time is flush,
    When crouching marrow, in the bearer strong,
    We sent to thee, to give thy rages balm,
    Above their quantity.
    Were not erected by their hands from whom
    You have receiv'd your griefs; nor are they such
    That these great tow'rs, trophies, and schools, should fall
    For private faults in them.
  SECOND SENATOR. Nor are they living
    Who were the motives that you first went out;
    Shame, that they wanted cunning, in excess
    Hath broke their hearts. March, noble lord,
    By decimation and a tithed death-
    Which nature loathes- take thou the destin'd tenth,
    And by the hazard of the spotted die
    Let die the spotted.
    Spare thy Athenian cradle, and those kin
    Which, in the bluster of thy wrath, must fall
    Approach the fold and cull th' infected forth,
    But kill not all together.
    Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile
    Against our rampir'd gates and they shall ope,
    That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress
    Shall make their harbour in our town till we
  ALCIBIADES. Then there's my glove;
    Shall pass his quarter or offend the stream
                       [The SENATORS descend and open the gates]
    Entomb'd upon the very hem o' th' sea;
                  ALCIBIADES reads the Epitaph
    These well express in thee thy latter spirits.
    Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
    And I will use the olive, with my sword;
    Prescribe to other, as each other's leech.
  SATURNINUS, son to the late Emperor of Rome, afterwards Emperor
  BASSIANUS, brother to Saturninus
  MARCUS ANDRONICUS, Tribune of the People, and brother to Titus
  TAMORA, Queen of the Goths
               Rome and the neighbourhood
Rome. Before the Capitol
Flourish. Enter the TRIBUNES and SENATORS aloft; and then enter below
at the other, with drums and trumpets
    Defend the justice of my cause with arms;
    I am his first born son that was the last
    That ware the imperial diadem of Rome;
    Then let my father's honours live in me,
    Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome,
    Keep then this passage to the Capitol;
        Enter MARCUS ANDRONICUS aloft, with the crown
    Know that the people of Rome, for whom we stand
    In election for the Roman empery
    Lives not this day within the city walls.
    He by the Senate is accited home,
    From weary wars against the barbarous Goths,
    In coffins from the field; and at this day
    To the monument of that Andronici
    And slain the noblest prisoner of the Goths.
    Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,
    And in the Capitol and Senate's right,
  SATURNINUS. How fair the Tribune speaks to calm my thoughts.
    And so I love and honour thee and thine,
    Thy noble brother Titus and his sons,
    And to my fortunes and the people's favour
                                Exeunt the soldiers of BASSIANUS
    And to the love and favour of my country
    Commit myself, my person, and the cause.
                               Exeunt the soldiers of SATURNINUS
    As I am confident and kind to thee.
    Open the gates and let me in.
                    [Flourish. They go up into the Senate House]
    Successful in the battles that he fights,
    And brought to yoke the enemies of Rome.
        Sound drums and trumpets, and then enter MARTIUS
        and MUTIUS, two of TITUS' sons; and then two men
        bearing a coffin covered with black; then LUCIUS
        and QUINTUS, two other sons; then TITUS ANDRONICUS;
        and then TAMORA the Queen of Goths, with her three
        sons, ALARBUS, DEMETRIUS, and CHIRON, with AARON the
        Moor, and others,  as many as can be. Then set down
        the coffin and TITUS speaks
    Lo, as the bark that hath discharg'd her fraught
    Returns with precious lading to the bay
    Stand gracious to the rites that we intend!
    Half of the number that King Priam had,
    Behold the poor remains, alive and dead!
    These that I bring unto their latest home,
    With burial amongst their ancestors.
    Here Goths have given me leave to sheathe my sword.
    To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?
    Make way to lay them by their brethren.
                                            [They open the tomb]
    There greet in silence, as the dead are wont,
  LUCIUS. Give us the proudest prisoner of the Goths,
    Before this earthy prison of their bones,
    That so the shadows be not unappeas'd,
  TITUS. I give him you- the noblest that survives,
  TAMORA. Stay, Roman brethen! Gracious conqueror,
    Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed,
    A mother's tears in passion for her son;
    And if thy sons were ever dear to thee,
    Captive to thee and to thy Roman yoke;
    But must my sons be slaughtered in the streets
    For valiant doings in their country's cause?
    Were piety in thine, it is in these.
    Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods?
    Draw near them then in being merciful.
    These are their brethren, whom your Goths beheld
    Alive and dead; and for their brethren slain
    Religiously they ask a sacrifice.
    T' appease their groaning shadows that are gone.
    Let's hew his limbs till they be clean consum'd.
    The self-same gods that arm'd the Queen of Troy
    Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent
    May favour Tamora, the Queen of Goths-
    To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.
   MUTIUS, the sons of ANDRONICUS, with their swords bloody
  LUCIUS. See, lord and father, how we have perform'd
    And entrails feed the sacrificing fire,
    Whose smoke like incense doth perfume the sky.
    And with loud 'larums welcome them to Rome.
    Make this his latest farewell to their souls.
                 [Sound trumpets and lay the coffin in the tomb]
    My noble lord and father, live in fame!
    Lavinia, live; outlive thy father's days,
  MARCUS. Long live Lord Titus, my beloved brother,
    Gracious triumpher in the eyes of Rome!
  TITUS. Thanks, gentle Tribune, noble brother Marcus.
    Titus Andronicus, the people of Rome,
    Send thee by me, their Tribune and their trust,
    And name thee in election for the empire
    With these our late-deceased Emperor's sons:
    Be candidatus then, and put it on,
    In right and service of their noble country.
    But not a sceptre to control the world.
  MARCUS. Titus, thou shalt obtain and ask the empery.
    Patricians, draw your swords, and sheathe them not
    Rather than rob me of the people's hearts!
  LUCIUS. Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good
    That noble-minded Titus means to thee!
  TITUS. Content thee, Prince; I will restore to thee
    The people's hearts, and wean them from themselves.
  BASSIANUS. Andronicus, I do not flatter thee,
    But honour thee, and will do till I die.
    My faction if thou strengthen with thy friends,
    Will ye bestow them friendly on Andronicus?
  TRIBUNES. To gratify the good Andronicus,
                           [A long flourish till they come down]
    I give thee thanks in part of thy deserts,
    And in the sacred Pantheon her espouse.
    Tell me, Andronicus, doth this motion please thee?
    Receive them then, the tribute that I owe,
  SATURNINUS. Thanks, noble Titus, father of my life.
    How proud I am of thee and of thy gifts
    The least of these unspeakable deserts,
  SATURNINUS.  [Aside]  A goodly lady, trust me; of the hue
    Can make you greater than the Queen of Goths.
    Warrants these words in princely courtesy.
  TITUS. How, sir! Are you in earnest then, my lord?
  TITUS. Traitors, avaunt! Where is the Emperor's guard?
    Bear his betroth'd from all the world away.
  MUTIUS. Brothers, help to convey her hence away,
            TITUS kills him. During the fray, exeunt SATURNINUS,
                 Re-enter aloft the EMPEROR
      with TAMORA and her two Sons, and AARON the Moor
    Traitor, restore Lavinia to the Emperor.
    That is another's lawful promis'd love.                 Exit
  SATURNINUS. No, Titus, no; the Emperor needs her not,
    Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock.
    Was there none else in Rome to make a stale
    Agree these deeds with that proud brag of thine
    That saidst I begg'd the empire at thy hands.
  TITUS. O monstrous! What reproachful words are these?
    To ruffle in the commonwealth of Rome.
  SATURNINUS. And therefore, lovely Tamora, Queen of Goths,
    That, like the stately Phoebe 'mongst her nymphs,
    Dost overshine the gallant'st dames of Rome,
    Behold, I choose thee, Tamora, for my bride
    And will create thee Emperess of Rome.
    And here I swear by all the Roman gods-
    I will not re-salute the streets of Rome,
    If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths,
    A loving nurse, a mother to his youth.
  SATURNINUS. Ascend, fair Queen, Pantheon. Lords, accompany
    Sent by the heavens for Prince Saturnine,
    Nor thou, nor these, confederates in the deed
    Unworthy brother and unworthy sons!
    Give Mutius burial with our bretheren.
    He must be buried with his bretheren.
  MARCUS. No, noble Titus, but entreat of thee
    And with these boys mine honour thou hast wounded.
                                [The BROTHER and the SONS kneel]
  MARCUS. Brother, for in that name doth nature plead-
  QUINTUS. Father, and in that name doth nature speak-
  TITUS. Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed.
  LUCIUS. Dear father, soul and substance of us all-
  MARCUS. Suffer thy brother Marcus to inter
    Let not young Mutius, then, that was thy joy,
    Well, bury him, and bury me the next.
                                   [They put MUTIUS in the tomb]
  MARCUS. My lord- to step out of these dreary dumps-
    How comes it that the subtle Queen of Goths
    Whether by device or no, the heavens can tell.
    Is she not, then, beholding to the man
           Flourish. Re-enter the EMPEROR, TAMORA
        and her two SONS, with the MOOR, at one door;
    at the other door, BASSIANUS and LAVINIA, with others
    My true betrothed love, and now my wife?
    But let the laws of Rome determine all;
    By all the duties that I owe to Rome,
    That, in the rescue of Lavinia,
    Receive him then to favour, Saturnine,
    A father and a friend to thee and Rome.
    Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge
  TAMORA. Not so, my lord; the gods of Rome forfend
    Lest, then, the people, and patricians too,
    Yield at entreats, and then let me alone:
    I'll find a day to massacre them all,
    And raze their faction and their family,
    The cruel father and his traitorous sons,
    And make them know what 'tis to let a queen
    Kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain.-
    Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart
    These words, these looks, infuse new life in me.
    And must advise the Emperor for his good.
    My word and promise to the Emperor
  SATURNINUS. Marcus, for thy sake, and thy brother's here,
    I do remit these young men's heinous faults.
    I would not part a bachelor from the priest.
    Come, if the Emperor's court can feast two brides,
    To hunt the panther and the hart with me,
Rome. Before the palace
    As when the golden sun salutes the morn,
    And, having gilt the ocean with his beams,
    Gallops the zodiac in his glistening coach
    And overlooks the highest-peering hills,
    Than is Prometheus tied to Caucasus.
    'Tis not the difference of a year or two
    Makes me less gracious or thee more fortunate:
    And that my sword upon thee shall approve,
  AARON.  [Aside]  Clubs, clubs! These lovers will not keep the
  DEMETRIUS. Why, boy, although our mother, unadvis'd,
  CHIRON. Meanwhile, sir, with the little skill I have,
    So near the Emperor's palace dare ye draw
    Full well I wot the ground of all this grudge:
    The cause were known to them it most concerns;
    Nor would your noble mother for much more
    Be so dishonoured in the court of Rome.
    Now, by the gods that warlike Goths adore,
    What, is Lavinia then become so loose,
    Young lords, beware; an should the Empress know
    This discord's ground, the music would not please.
  CHIRON. I care not, I, knew she and all the world:
    I love Lavinia more than all the world.
    Lavina is thine elder brother's hope.
    How furious and impatient they be,
    She is a woman, therefore may be woo'd;
    She is a woman, therefore may be won;
    She is Lavinia, therefore must be lov'd.
    What, man! more water glideth by the mill
    Than wots the miller of; and easy it is
    Though Bassianus be the Emperor's brother,
    And borne her cleanly by the keeper's nose?
  AARON. Why, then, it seems some certain snatch or so
  CHIRON. Ay, so the turn were served.
    To square for this? Would it offend you, then,
    Must we pursue, and I have found the path.
    There will the lovely Roman ladies troop;
    And many unfrequented plots there are
    Single you thither then this dainty doe,
    The Emperor's court is like the house of Fame,
  DEMETRIUS. Sit fas aut nefas, till I find the stream
    To cool this heat, a charm to calm these fits,
  TITUS. The hunt is up, the morn is bright and grey,
    The fields are fragrant, and the woods are green.
    And wake the Emperor and his lovely bride,
    And rouse the Prince, and ring a hunter's peal,
    That all the court may echo with the noise.
    To attend the Emperor's person carefully.
            CHIRON, DEMETRIUS, and their attendants
  SATURNINUS. Come on then, horse and chariots let us have,
    Will rouse the proudest panther in the chase,
    And climb the highest promontory top.
  TITUS. And I have horse will follow where the game
    Makes way, and run like swallows o'er the plain.
A lonely part of the forest
    And so repose, sweet gold, for their unrest
                                                [Hides the gold]
    That have their alms out of the Empress' chest.
               Enter TAMORA alone, to the Moor
    The snakes lie rolled in the cheerful sun;
    The green leaves quiver with the cooling wind
    And make a chequer'd shadow on the ground;
    Under their sweet shade, Aaron, let us sit,
    And while the babbling echo mocks the hounds,
    Replying shrilly to the well-tun'd horns,
    Let us sit down and mark their yellowing noise;
    When with a happy storm they were surpris'd,
    We may, each wreathed in the other's arms,
    No, madam, these are no venereal signs.
    Hark, Tamora, the empress of my soul,
    Which never hopes more heaven than rests in thee-
    This is the day of doom for Bassianus;
    And wash their hands in Bassianus' blood.
    Seest thou this letter? Take it up, I pray thee,
    And give the King this fatal-plotted scroll.
    Which dreads not yet their lives' destruction.
    To back thy quarrels, whatsoe'er they be.               Exit
    To see the general hunting in this forest?
    Had I the pow'r that some say Dian had,
    With horns, as was Actaeon's; and the hounds
    'Tis pity they should take him for a stag.
    And wand'red hither to an obscure plot,
    This valley fits the purpose passing well.
  BASSIANUS. The King my brother shall have notice of this.
  LAVINIA. Ay, for these slips have made him noted long.
  DEMETRIUS. How now, dear sovereign, and our gracious mother!
    These two have 'ticed me hither to this place.
    Here never shines the sun; here nothing breeds,
    Unless the nightly owl or fatal raven.
    And when they show'd me this abhorred pit,
    They told me, here, at dead time of the night,
    No sooner had they told this hellish tale
    But straight they told me they would bind me here
    Unto the body of a dismal yew,
    And then they call'd me foul adulteress,
    Lascivious Goth, and all the bitterest terms
    This vengeance on me had they executed.
    Revenge it, as you love your mother's life,
  TAMORA. Give me the poniard; you shall know, my boys,
    Your mother's hand shall right your mother's wrong.
    First thrash the corn, then after burn the straw.
  TAMORA. But when ye have the honey we desire,
    To see her tears; but be your heart to them
  LAVINIA. When did the tiger's young ones teach the dam?
    O, do not learn her wrath- she taught it thee;
    Yet every mother breeds not sons alike:
  LAVINIA. 'Tis true, the raven doth not hatch a lark.
    The whilst their own birds famish in their nests;
  LAVINIA. O, let me teach thee! For my father's sake,
    That gave thee life when well he might have slain thee,
    To save your brother from the sacrifice;
    The worse to her the better lov'd of me.
  TAMORA. What beg'st thou, then? Fond woman, let me go.
    O, keep me from their worse than killing lust,
  TAMORA. So should I rob my sweet sons of their fee;
    No, let them satisfy their lust on thee.
  CHIRON. Nay, then I'll stop your mouth. Bring thou her husband.
    This is the hole where Aaron bid us hide him.
                 DEMETRIUS throws the body
           of BASSIANUS into the pit; then exeunt
    Till all the Andronici be made away.
  AARON. Come on, my lords, the better foot before;
    Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit
    Where I espied the panther fast asleep.
                                            [Falls into the pit]
    Speak, brother, hast thou hurt thee with the fall?
  MARTIUS. O brother, with the dismal'st object hurt
  AARON.  [Aside]  Now will I fetch the King to find them here,
    That he thereby may have a likely guess
    How these were they that made away his brother.         Exit
    Doth shine upon the dead man's earthy cheeks,
    And shows the ragged entrails of this pit;
    So pale did shine the moon on Pyramus
    O brother, help me with thy fainting hand-
    If fear hath made thee faint, as me it hath-
  QUINTUS. Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee out,
    Or, wanting strength to do thee so much good,
    I may be pluck'd into the swallowing womb
    I have no strength to pluck thee to the brink.
    Thou canst not come to me- I come to thee.        [Falls in]
            Enter the EMPEROR and AARON the Moor
    Into this gaping hollow of the earth?
    Brought hither in a most unlucky hour,
    To find thy brother Bassianus dead.
  SATURNINUS. My brother dead! I know thou dost but jest:
    He and his lady both are at the lodge
    Upon the north side of this pleasant chase;
    'Tis not an hour since I left them there.
  MARTIUS. We know not where you left them all alive;
  TAMORA. Where is my lord the King?
  TAMORA. Where is thy brother Bassianus?
  SATURNINUS. Now to the bottom dost thou search my wound;
    Do thou so much as dig the grave for him.
    Among the nettles at the elder-tree
    Which overshades the mouth of that same pit
    O Tamora! was ever heard the like?
    This is the pit and this the elder-tree.
    Look, sirs, if you can find the huntsman out
  AARON. My gracious lord, here is the bag of gold.
    Have here bereft my brother of his life.
    Sirs, drag them from the pit unto the prison;
    There let them bide until we have devis'd
    Some never-heard-of torturing pain for them.
  TAMORA. What, are they in this pit? O wondrous thing!
    Accursed if the fault be prov'd in them-
  TITUS. I did, my lord, yet let me be their bail;
    For, by my fathers' reverend tomb, I vow
    To answer their suspicion with their lives.
  SATURNINUS. Thou shalt not bail them; see thou follow me.
    Some bring the murdered body, some the murderers;
    Let them not speak a word- the guilt is plain;
    For, by my soul, were there worse end than death,
    That end upon them should be executed.
  TAMORA. Andronicus, I will entreat the King.
    Fear not thy sons; they shall do well enough.
  TITUS. Come, Lucius, come; stay not to talk with them.     Exeunt
Another part of the forest
Enter the Empress' sons, DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, with LAVINIA,
    Who 'twas that cut thy tongue and ravish'd thee.
    An if thy stumps will let thee play the scribe.
  DEMETRIUS. If thou hadst hands to help thee knit the cord.
    But sure some Tereus hath deflowered thee,
    Shall I speak for thee? Shall I say 'tis so?
    O, that I knew thy heart, and knew the beast,
    Doth burn the heart to cinders where it is.
    But, lovely niece, that mean is cut from thee.
    O, had the monster seen those lily hands
    And make the silken strings delight to kiss them,
    He would not then have touch'd them for his life!
    Or had he heard the heavenly harmony
    As Cerberus at the Thracian poet's feet.
    Come, let us go, and make thy father blind,
    For such a sight will blind a father's eye;
    One hour's storm will drown the fragrant meads,
    What will whole months of tears thy father's eyes?
    Do not draw back, for we will mourn with thee;
Enter the JUDGES, TRIBUNES, and SENATORS, with TITUS' two sons
MARTIUS and QUINTUS bound, passing on the stage to the place of execution,
  TITUS. Hear me, grave fathers; noble Tribunes, stay!
    For all the frosty nights that I have watch'd,
    And for these bitter tears, which now you see
    Filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks,
    Because they died in honour's lofty bed.
                          [ANDRONICUS lieth down, and the judges
                     pass by him with the prisoners, and exeunt]
    For these, Tribunes, in the dust I write
    Let my tears stanch the earth's dry appetite;
    O earth, I will befriend thee more with rain
    That shall distil from these two ancient urns,
    In summer's drought I'll drop upon thee still;
    In winter with warm tears I'll melt the snow
    Unbind my sons, reverse the doom of death,
  LUCIUS. O noble father, you lament in vain;
  TITUS. Ah, Lucius, for thy brothers let me plead!
  TITUS. Why, 'tis no matter, man: if they did hear,
    They would not mark me; if they did mark,
    And bootless unto them.
    Therefore I tell my sorrows to the stones;
    Who though they cannot answer my distress,
    Yet in some sort they are better than the Tribunes,
    For that they will not intercept my tale.
    When I do weep, they humbly at my feet
    And were they but attired in grave weeds,
    Rome could afford no tribunes like to these.
    And tribunes with their tongues doom men to death.
  LUCIUS. To rescue my two brothers from their death;
    For which attempt the judges have pronounc'd
  TITUS. O happy man! they have befriended thee.
    But me and mine; how happy art thou then
    From these devourers to be banished!
    But who comes with our brother Marcus here?
  TITUS. Will it consume me? Let me see it then.
    Hath made thee handless in thy father's sight?
    What fool hath added water to the sea,
    My grief was at the height before thou cam'st,
    For they have fought for Rome, and all in vain;
    And they have nurs'd this woe in feeding life;
    In bootless prayer have they been held up,
    And they have serv'd me to effectless use.
    Now all the service I require of them
    Is that the one will help to cut the other.
  LUCIUS. Speak, gentle sister, who hath martyr'd thee?
    That blabb'd them with such pleasing eloquence
  MARCUS. O, thus I found her straying in the park,
    Seeking to hide herself as doth the deer
    Who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave,
    Here stands my other son, a banish'd man,
    And here my brother, weeping at my woes.
    But that which gives my soul the greatest spurn
    Nor tongue to tell me who hath martyr'd thee;
    Thy brothers are condemn'd, and dead by this.
    When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears
    Stood on her cheeks, as doth the honey dew
    Upon a gath'red lily almost withered.
  MARCUS. Perchance she weeps because they kill'd her husband;
    Perchance because she knows them innocent.
  TITUS. If they did kill thy husband, then be joyful,
    Because the law hath ta'en revenge on them.
    No, no, they would not do so foul a deed;
    Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.
    Or make some sign how I may do thee ease.
    Shall thy good uncle and thy brother Lucius
    How they are stain'd, like meadows yet not dry
    With miry slime left on them by a flood?
    And in the fountain shall we gaze so long,
    Till the fresh taste be taken from that clearness,
    Pass the remainder of our hateful days?
    Plot some device of further misery
  LUCIUS. Sweet father, cease your tears; for at your grief
  TITUS. Ah, Marcus, Marcus! Brother, well I wot
    That to her brother which I said to thee:
                   Enter AARON the Moor
  AARON. Titus Andronicus, my lord the Emperor
    Sends thee this word, that, if thou love thy sons,
    And send it to the King: he for the same
    Will send thee hither both thy sons alive,
    And that shall be the ransom for their fault.
    That gives sweet tidings of the sun's uprise?
    With all my heart I'll send the Emperor my hand.
  LUCIUS. Stay, father! for that noble hand of thine,
    Shall not be sent. My hand will serve the turn,
    And therefore mine shall save my brothers' lives.
    And rear'd aloft the bloody battle-axe,
    Writing destruction on the enemy's castle?
    To ransom my two nephews from their death;
    For fear they die before their pardon come.
  TITUS. Sirs, strive no more; such with'red herbs as these
    Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine.
  LUCIUS. Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son,
    Let me redeem my brothers both from death.
  MARCUS. And for our father's sake and mother's care,
    Now let me show a brother's love to thee.
  MARCUS. But I will use the axe.
  TITUS. Come hither, Aaron, I'll deceive them both;
    Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine.
    But I'll deceive you in another sort,
    As for my sons, say I account of them
    Look by and by to have thy sons with thee.
    Doth fat me with the very thoughts of it!
    And bow this feeble ruin to the earth;
    Do, then, dear heart; for heaven shall hear our prayers,
    Or with our sighs we'll breathe the welkin dim
    And stain the sun with fog, as sometime clouds
    When they do hug him in their melting bosoms.
  MARCUS. O brother, speak with possibility,
    And do not break into these deep extremes.
    Then be my passions bottomless with them.
  TITUS. If there were reason for these miseries,
    When heaven doth weep, doth not the earth o'erflow?
    If the winds rage, doth not the sea wax mad,
    Threat'ning the welkin with his big-swol'n face?
    I am the sea; hark how her sighs do blow.
    She is the weeping welkin, I the earth;
    But like a drunkard must I vomit them.
    To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues.
    For that good hand thou sent'st the Emperor.
    Here are the heads of thy two noble sons;
    And here's thy hand, in scorn to thee sent back-
    Thy grief their sports, thy resolution mock'd,
    More than remembrance of my father's death.             Exit
    To weep with them that weep doth ease some deal,
    And yet detested life not shrink thereat!
    Where life hath no more interest but to breathe!
    Thy other banish'd son with this dear sight
    Struck pale and bloodless; and thy brother, I,
    Rent off thy silver hair, thy other hand
  TITUS. Why, I have not another tear to shed;
    And make them blind with tributary tears.
    For these two heads do seem to speak to me,
    Till all these mischiefs be return'd again
    Even in their throats that have committed them.
    The vow is made. Come, brother, take a head,
    And in this hand the other will I bear.
    As for thee, boy, go, get thee from my sight;
    Hie to the Goths and raise an army there;
  LUCIUS. Farewell, Andronicus, my noble father,
    Beg at the gates like Tarquin and his queen.
    Now will I to the Goths, and raise a pow'r
Enter TITUS, MARCUS, LAVINIA, and the boy YOUNG LUCIUS
    As will revenge these bitter woes of ours.
    Marcus, unknit that sorrow-wreathen knot;
    That all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall
    Drown the lamenting fool in sea-salt tears.
  MARCUS. Fie, brother, fie! Teach her not thus to lay
  TITUS. How now! Has sorrow made thee dote already?
    Ah, wherefore dost thou urge the name of hands?
    To bid Aeneas tell the tale twice o'er
    O, handle not the theme, to talk of hands,
    If Marcus did not name the word of hands!
    She says she drinks no other drink but tears,
    As begging hermits in their holy prayers.
    But I of these will wrest an alphabet,
  BOY. Good grandsire, leave these bitter deep laments;
  MARCUS. Alas, the tender boy, in passion mov'd,
                          [MARCUS strikes the dish with a knife]
  TITUS. Out on thee, murderer, thou kill'st my heart!
    A deed of death done on the innocent
    Becomes not Titus' brother. Get thee gone;
  TITUS. 'But!' How if that fly had a father and mother?
    And buzz lamenting doings in the air!
    Like to the Empress' Moor; therefore I kill'd him.
    Then pardon me for reprehending thee,
    Flattering myself as if it were the Moor
    Come hither purposely to poison me.
    I'll to thy closet, and go read with thee
    Sad stories chanced in the times of old.
and the boy flies from her with his books under his arm.
  TITUS. She loves thee, boy, too well to do thee harm.
  BOY. Ay, when my father was in Rome she did.
  MARCUS. What means my niece Lavinia by these signs?
    See, Lucius, see how much she makes of thee.
    Somewhither would she have thee go with her.
    Read to her sons than she hath read to thee
  MARCUS. Canst thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus?
    Loves me as dear as e'er my mother did,
                     stumps the books which Lucius has let fall]
    Some book there is that she desires to see.
    Which is it, girl, of these?- Open them, boy.-
    And so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens
    Reveal the damn'd contriver of this deed.
  MARCUS. I think she means that there were more than one
    Confederate in the fact; ay, more there was,
    Or else to heaven she heaves them for revenge.
    My mother gave it me.
    Perhaps she cull'd it from among the rest.
  TITUS. Soft! So busily she turns the leaves! Help her.
    This is the tragic tale of Philomel
  MARCUS. See, brother, see! Note how she quotes the leaves.
    Forc'd in the ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods?
    Ay, such a place there is where we did hunt-
    O, had we never, never hunted there!-
    Pattern'd by that the poet here describes,
    Unless the gods delight in tragedies?
    What Roman lord it was durst do the deed.
    That left the camp to sin in Lucrece' bed?
  MARCUS. Sit down, sweet niece; brother, sit down by me.
    Without the help of any hand at all.
    That we may know the traitors and the truth!
                               [She takes the staff in her mouth
  MARCUS. What, what! the lustful sons of Tamora
  MARCUS. O, calm thee, gentle lord! although I know
    To stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts,
    And arm the minds of infants to exclaims.
    And kneel, sweet boy, the Roman Hector's hope;
    And swear with me- as, with the woeful fere
    And father of that chaste dishonoured dame,
    Mortal revenge upon these traitorous Goths,
    And see their blood or die with this reproach.
    But if you hunt these bear-whelps, then beware:
    She's with the lion deeply still in league,
    And with a gad of steel will write these words,
    And lay it by. The angry northern wind
    Will blow these sands like Sibyl's leaves abroad,
    And where's our lesson, then? Boy, what say you?
    Their mother's bedchamber should not be safe
    For these base bondmen to the yoke of Rome.
  MARCUS. Ay, that's my boy! Thy father hath full oft
    For his ungrateful country done the like.
    Lucius, I'll fit thee; and withal my boy
    Shall carry from me to the Empress' sons
    Presents that I intend to send them both.
  BOY. Ay, with my dagger in their bosoms, grandsire.
  TITUS. No, boy, not so; I'll teach thee another course.
    Lucius and I'll go brave it at the court;
    Revenge the heavens for old Andronicus!                 Exit
Enter AARON, DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, at one door; and at the other door,
YOUNG LUCIUS and another with a bundle of weapons, and verses writ upon them
  CHIRON. Demetrius, here's the son of Lucius;
  AARON. Ay, some mad message from his mad grandfather.
  BOY. My lords, with all the humbleness I may,
    [Aside]  And pray the Roman gods confound you both!
  DEMETRIUS. Gramercy, lovely Lucius. What's the news?
  BOY.  [Aside]  That you are both decipher'd, that's the news,
    I read it in the grammar long ago.
    Here's no sound jest! The old man hath found their guilt,
    And sends them weapons wrapp'd about with lines
    That wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick.
    It did me good before the palace gate
    To brave the Tribune in his brother's hearing.
  AARON. Here lacks but your mother for to say amen.
  DEMETRIUS. Come, let us go and pray to all the gods
    For our beloved mother in her pains.
  AARON.  [Aside]  Pray to the devils; the gods have given us over.
  DEMETRIUS. Why do the Emperor's trumpets flourish thus?
  CHIRON. Belike, for joy the Emperor hath a son.
    O, tell me, did you see Aaron the Moor?
    Now help, or woe betide thee evermore!
  AARON. Why, then she is the devil's dam;
    Here is the babe, as loathsome as a toad
    Amongst the fair-fac'd breeders of our clime;
    The Empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal,
    And bids thee christen it with thy dagger's point.
  CHIRON. Thou hast undone our mother.
  AARON. Villain, I have done thy mother.
  DEMETRIUS. And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone her.
    Woe to her chance, and damn'd her loathed choice!
    Accurs'd the offspring of so foul a fiend!
  NURSE. Aaron, it must; the mother wills it so.
  DEMETRIUS. I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point.
                     [Takes the CHILD from the NURSE, and draws]
    Stay, murderous villains, will you kill your brother!
    Now, by the burning tapers of the sky
    Nor great Alcides, nor the god of war,
    Shall seize this prey out of his father's hands.
    Coal-black is better than another hue
    In that it scorns to bear another hue;
    For all the water in the ocean
    Can never turn the swan's black legs to white,
    Although she lave them hourly in the flood.
    Tell the Empress from me I am of age
    The vigour and the picture of my youth.
    This before all the world do I prefer;
    This maugre all the world will I keep safe,
  DEMETRIUS. By this our mother is for ever sham'd.
  AARON. Why, there's the privilege your beauty bears:
    Here's a young lad fram'd of another leer.
    Look how the black slave smiles upon the father,
    He is your brother, lords, sensibly fed
    Nay, he is your brother by the surer side,
  NURSE. Aaron, what shall I say unto the Empress?
  DEMETRIUS. Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done,
    Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.
    My son and I will have the wind of you:
    Keep there; now talk at pleasure of your safety.
    I am a lamb; but if you brave the Moor,
    The chafed boar, the mountain lioness,
    But say, again, how many saw the child?
  NURSE. Cornelia the midwife and myself;
    And no one else but the delivered Empress.
  AARON. The Emperess, the midwife, and yourself.
    Two may keep counsel when the third's away:
    Go to the Empress, tell her this I said.      [He kills her]
    So cries a pig prepared to the spit.
    Go pack with him, and give the mother gold,
    And tell them both the circumstance of all,
    And how by this their child shall be advanc'd,
    And be received for the Emperor's heir
    And substituted in the place of mine,
    To calm this tempest whirling in the court;
    And let the Emperor dandle him for his own.
                                         [Pointing to the NURSE]
    But send the midwife presently to me.
    The midwife and the nurse well made away,
    Then let the ladies tattle what they please.
  CHIRON. Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the air
    Herself and hers are highly bound to thee.
         Exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, bearing off the dead NURSE
  AARON. Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies,
    And secretly to greet the Empress' friends.
    And feed on curds and whey, and suck the goat,
                                             Exit with the CHILD
Enter TITUS, bearing arrows with letters on the ends of them;
with him MARCUS, YOUNG LUCIUS, and other gentlemen,
  TITUS. Come, Marcus, come; kinsmen, this is the way.
    Look ye draw home enough, and 'tis there straight.
    Go sound the ocean and cast your nets;
    Happily you may catch her in the sea;
    Yet there's as little justice as at land.
    And pierce the inmost centre of the earth;
    Ah, Rome! Well, well, I made thee miserable
    What time I threw the people's suffrages
    And, kinsmen, then we may go pipe for justice.
    Join with the Goths, and with revengeful war
    And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine.
    I'll dive into the burning lake below
    And pull her out of Acheron by the heels.
    No big-bon'd men fram'd of the Cyclops' size;
    But metal, Marcus, steel to the very back,
    And, sith there's no justice in earth nor hell,
    We will solicit heaven, and move the gods
                                      [He gives them the arrows]
    You were as good to shoot against the wind.
  MARCUS. Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the court;
    We will afflict the Emperor in his pride.
  MARCUS. My lord, I aim a mile beyond the moon;
  MARCUS. This was the sport, my lord: when Publius shot,
    That down fell both the Ram's horns in the court;
    And who should find them but the Empress' villain?
    She laugh'd, and told the Moor he should not choose
    But give them to his master for a present.
  TITUS. Why, there it goes! God give his lordship joy!
    Enter the CLOWN, with a basket and two pigeons in it
    News, news from heaven! Marcus, the post is come.
  CLOWN. Ho, the gibbet-maker? He says that he hath taken them down
    again, for the man must not be hang'd till the next week.
  TITUS. But what says Jupiter, I ask thee?
  TITUS. Why, villain, art not thou the carrier?
  CLOWN. From heaven! Alas, sir, I never came there. God forbid I
    going with my pigeons to the Tribunal Plebs, to take up a matter
    of brawl betwixt my uncle and one of the Emperal's men.
    oration; and let him deliver the pigeons to the Emperor from you.
  TITUS. Tell me, can you deliver an oration to the Emperor with a
  TITUS. Sirrah, come hither. Make no more ado,
    But give your pigeons to the Emperor;
    him, at the first approach you must kneel; then kiss his foot;
    then deliver up your pigeons; and then look for your reward. I'll
    Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration;
    And when thou hast given it to the Emperor,
Rome. Before the palace
Enter the EMPEROR, and the EMPRESS and her two sons, DEMETRIUS and CHIRON;
LORDS and others. The EMPEROR brings the arrows in his hand that TITUS
  SATURNINUS. Why, lords, what wrongs are these! Was ever seen
    Troubled, confronted thus; and, for the extent
    My lords, you know, as know the mightful gods,
    However these disturbers of our peace
    Buzz in the people's ears, there nought hath pass'd
    But even with law against the wilful sons
    This 'To Apollo'; this 'To the God of War'-
    Sweet scrolls to fly about the streets of Rome!
    What's this but libelling against the Senate,
    Shall be no shelter to these outrages;
    Cut off the proud'st conspirator that lives.
    Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus' age,
    And rather comfort his distressed plight
    Than prosecute the meanest or the best
    For these contempts.  [Aside]  Why, thus it shall become
    But, Titus, I have touch'd thee to the quick,
    Then is all safe, the anchor in the port.
  TAMORA. Empress I am, but yonder sits the Emperor.
                                   [SATURNINUS reads the letter]
  CLOWN. Hang'd! by'r lady, then I have brought up a neck to a fair
    That died by law for murder of our brother
    Go drag the villain hither by the hair;
    What news with thee, Aemilius?
    The Goths have gathered head; and with a power
    Of high resolved men, bent to the spoil,
    They hither march amain, under conduct
  SATURNINUS. Is warlike Lucius general of the Goths?
    These tidings nip me, and I hang the head
    'Tis he the common people love so much;
    Myself hath often heard them say-
    And they have wish'd that Lucius were their emperor.
  SATURNINUS. Ay, but the citizens favour Lucius,
    Is the sun dimm'd, that gnats do fly in it?
    And is not careful what they mean thereby,
    Knowing that with the shadow of his wings
    He can at pleasure stint their melody;
    Even so mayest thou the giddy men of Rome.
    I will enchant the old Andronicus
    When as the one is wounded with the bait,
    The other rotted with delicious feed.
  TAMORA. If Tamora entreat him, then he will;
    Say that the Emperor requests a parley
    Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting
    Even at his father's house, the old Andronicus.
    And temper him with all the art I have,
    To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.
    And now, sweet Emperor, be blithe again,
    Which signifies what hate they bear their Emperor
    And how desirous of our sight they are.
  FIRST GOTH. Brave slip, sprung from the great Andronicus,
    Led by their master to the flow'red fields,
    Upon the wasted building, suddenly
    I made unto the noise, when soon I heard
    Had nature lent thee but thy mother's look,
    But where the bull and cow are both milk-white,
    Peace, villain, peace!'- even thus he rates the babe-
    'For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth,
    Who, when he knows thou art the Empress' babe,
    Will hold thee dearly for thy mother's sake.'
    Surpris'd him suddenly, and brought him hither
    To use as you think needful of the man.
  LUCIUS. O worthy Goth, this is the incarnate devil
    This is the pearl that pleas'd your Empress' eye;
    And here's the base fruit of her burning lust.
    Say, wall-ey'd slave, whither wouldst thou convey
  AARON. Touch not the boy, he is of royal blood.
  LUCIUS. Too like the sire for ever being good.
    First hang the child, that he may see it sprawl-
    A sight to vex the father's soul withal.
  AARON. Lucius, save the child,
    And bear it from me to the Emperess.
    If thou do this, I'll show thee wondrous things
    That highly may advantage thee to hear;
  AARON. An if it please thee! Why, assure thee, Lucius,
  AARON. Swear that he shall, and then I will begin.
    And hast a thing within thee called conscience,
    Which I have seen thee careful to observe,
    And keeps the oath which by that god he swears,
    Or else I will discover nought to thee.
  LUCIUS. Even by my god I swear to thee I will.
  AARON. First know thou, I begot him on the Empress.
    Trim sport for them which had the doing of it.
  AARON. Indeed, I was their tutor to instruct them.
    That codding spirit had they from their mother,
    As sure a card as ever won the set;
    That bloody mind, I think, they learn'd of me,
    Where the dead corpse of Bassianus lay;
    I wrote the letter that thy father found,
    And hid the gold within that letter mention'd,
    Confederate with the Queen and her two sons;
    I play'd the cheater for thy father's hand,
    I pried me through the crevice of a wall,
    And when I told the Empress of this sport,
  AARON. Ay, like a black dog, as the saying is.
  LUCIUS. Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds?
    Even now I curse the day- and yet, I think,
    Few come within the compass of my curse-
    Ravish a maid, or plot the way to do it;
    Make poor men's cattle break their necks;
    Set fire on barns and hay-stacks in the night,
    And bid the owners quench them with their tears.
    Oft have I digg'd up dead men from their graves,
    And set them upright at their dear friends' door
    Even when their sorrows almost was forgot,
    And on their skins, as on the bark of trees,
  LUCIUS. Bring down the devil, for he must not die
  AARON. If there be devils, would I were a devil,
  GOTH. My lord, there is a messenger from Rome
    Welcome, Aemilius. What's the news from Rome?
  AEMILIUS. Lord Lucius, and you Princes of the Goths,
    He craves a parley at your father's house,
    And they shall be immediately deliver'd.
  LUCIUS. Aemilius, let the Emperor give his pledges
    Unto my father and my uncle Marcus.
    Knock at his study, where they say he keeps
    Is it your trick to make me ope the door,
  TAMORA. Titus, I am come to talk with thee.
    Thou hast the odds of me; therefore no more.
  TITUS. I am not mad, I know thee well enough:
    Witness this wretched stump, witness these crimson lines;
    Witness these trenches made by grief and care;
    Witness the tiring day and heavy night;
    Witness all sorrow that I know thee well
    Is not thy coming for my other hand?
    To ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind
    Can couch for fear but I will find them out;
    And in their ears tell them my dreadful name-
    Revenge, which makes the foul offender quake.
  TAMORA. I am; therefore come down and welcome me.
  TITUS. Do me some service ere I come to thee.
    Stab them, or tear them on thy chariot wheels;
    And then I'll come and be thy waggoner
    And whirl along with thee about the globes.
    Provide thee two proper palfreys, black as jet,
    And find out murderers in their guilty caves;
    And when thy car is loaden with their heads,
    Even from Hyperion's rising in the east
    Until his very downfall in the sea.
    So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.
  TITUS. Are they thy ministers? What are they call'd?
  TAMORA. Rape and Murder; therefore called so
    'Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.
  TITUS. Good Lord, how like the Empress' sons they are!
    And you the Empress! But we worldly men
    O sweet Revenge, now do I come to thee;
    And, if one arm's embracement will content thee,
    I will embrace thee in it by and by.
    To scatter and disperse the giddy Goths,
    Or, at the least, make them his enemies.
    See, here he comes, and I must ply my theme.
  TITUS. Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee.
    How like the Empress and her sons you are!
    For well I wot the Empress never wags
    But in her company there is a Moor;
  TAMORA. Show me a thousand that hath done thee wrong,
    And I will be revenged on them all.
  TITUS. Look round about the wicked streets of Rome,
    To find another that is like to thee,
    Go thou with them; and in the Emperor's court
    For up and down she doth resemble thee.
    I pray thee, do on them some violent death;
    But would it please thee, good Andronicus,
    I will bring in the Empress and her sons,
    And at thy mercy shall they stoop and kneel,
    And on them shalt thou ease thy angry heart.
  TITUS. Marcus, my brother! 'Tis sad Titus calls.
    Thou shalt inquire him out among the Goths.
    Some of the chiefest princes of the Goths;
    Bid him encamp his soldiers where they are.
    Tell him the Emperor and the Empress too
    Feast at my house, and he shall feast with them.
    As he regards his aged father's life.
    Or else I'll call my brother back again,
    Whiles I go tell my lord the Emperor
  TITUS.  [Aside]  I knew them all, though they suppos'd me mad,
    And will o'er reach them in their own devices,
    A pair of cursed hell-hounds and their dam.
    Publius, come hither, Caius, and Valentine.
  TITUS. Know you these two?
  PUBLIUS. The Empress' sons, I take them: Chiron, Demetrius.
    The one is Murder, and Rape is the other's name;
    And therefore bind them, gentle Publius-
    Caius and Valentine, lay hands on them.
    And now I find it; therefore bind them sure,
    And stop their mouths if they begin to cry.             Exit
  CHIRON. Villains, forbear! we are the Empress' sons.
  PUBLIUS. And therefore do we what we are commanded.
    Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a word.
    Is he sure bound? Look that you bind them fast.
    Sirs, stop their mouths, let them not speak to me;
    But let them hear what fearful words I utter.
    Here stands the spring whom you have stain'd with mud;
    Two of her brothers were condemn'd to death,
    You know your mother means to feast with me,
    And of the paste a coffin I will rear,
    Like to the earth, swallow her own increase.
    This is the feast that I have bid her to,
    And this the banquet she shall surfeit on;
    Receive the blood; and when that they are dead,
    Let me go grind their bones to powder small,
    And in that paste let their vile heads be bak'd.
    More stern and bloody than the Centaurs' feast.
                                         [He cuts their throats]
    Now bring them in, for I will play the cook,
    And see them ready against their mother comes.
                                 Exeunt, bearing the dead bodies
Enter Lucius, MARCUS, and the GOTHS, with AARON prisoner,
and his CHILD in the arms of an attendant
  LUCIUS. Uncle Marcus, since 'tis my father's mind
    Till he be brought unto the Empress' face
    And see the ambush of our friends be strong;
    I fear the Emperor means no good to us.
    The trumpets show the Emperor is at hand.
    TAMORA, with AEMILIUS, TRIBUNES, SENATORS, and others
  SATURNINUS. What, hath the firmament more suns than one?
  LUCIUS. What boots it thee to can thyself a sun?
  MARCUS. Rome's Emperor, and nephew, break the parle;
    The feast is ready which the careful Titus
    Please you, therefore, draw nigh and take your places.
         like a cook, placing the dishes, and LAVINIA
   with a veil over her face; also YOUNG LUCIUS, and others
    And welcome all. Although the cheer be poor,
    My lord the Emperor, resolve me this:
  SATURNINUS. Because the girl should not survive her shame,
    For me, most wretched, to perform the like.
    Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee;   [He kills her]
    And with thy shame thy father's sorrow die!
  SATURNINUS. What, was she ravish'd? Tell who did the deed.
    And they, 'twas they, that did her all this wrong.
  SATURNINUS. Go, fetch them hither to us presently.
  TITUS. Why, there they are, both baked in this pie,
    Whereof their mother daintily hath fed,
    Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred.
                                          [He stabs the EMPRESS]
  LUCIUS. Can the son's eye behold his father bleed?
               MARCUS, and their friends go up into the balcony]
    Or who hath brought the fatal engine in
    That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound.
    And break my utt'rance, even in the time
    Here's Rome's young Captain, let him tell the tale;
    That Chiron and the damn'd Demetrius
    Were they that murd'red our Emperor's brother;
    And they it were that ravished our sister.
    For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded,
    Our father's tears despis'd, and basely cozen'd
    And sent her enemies unto the grave.
    Who drown'd their enmity in my true tears,
    And op'd their arms to embrace me as a friend.
    I am the turned forth, be it known to you,
    And from her bosom took the enemy's point,
    Sheathing the steel in my advent'rous body.
    My scars can witness, dumb although they are,
    For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.
  MARCUS. Now is my turn to speak. Behold the child.
                  [Pointing to the CHILD in an attendant's arms]
    Chief architect and plotter of these woes.
    Now have you heard the truth: what say you, Romans?
    And, from the place where you behold us pleading,
    And on the ragged stones beat forth our souls,
    And hither hale that misbelieving Moor
              attendants. LUCIUS, MARCUS, and the others descend
    Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips.
    O, were the sum of these that I should pay
    Countless and infinite, yet would I pay them!
  LUCIUS. Come hither, boy; come, come, come, and learn of us
    To melt in showers. Thy grandsire lov'd thee well;
    Many a time he danc'd thee on his knee,
    Sung thee asleep, his loving breast thy pillow;
    Many a story hath he told to thee,
    And bid thee bear his pretty tales in mind
    And talk of them when he was dead and gone.
  MARCUS. How many thousand times hath these poor lips,
    When they were living, warm'd themselves on thine!
    O, now, sweet boy, give them their latest kiss!
    Bid him farewell; commit him to the grave;
    Do them that kindness, and take leave of them.
    Give sentence on the execrable wretch
    That hath been breeder of these dire events.
    For the offence he dies. This is our doom.
    Some stay to see him fast'ned in the earth.
    I should repent the evils I have done;
  LUCIUS. Some loving friends convey the Emperor hence,
    And give him burial in his father's grave.
    My father and Lavinia shall forthwith
  CALCHAS, a Trojan priest, taking part with the Greeks
  AGAMEMNON, the Greek general
  MENELAUS, his brother
             Troy and the Greek camp before it
    In Troy, there lies the scene. From isles of Greece
    The princes orgillous, their high blood chaf'd,
    Have to the port of Athens sent their ships
    Fraught with the ministers and instruments
    Their crownets regal from th' Athenian bay
    Put forth toward Phrygia; and their vow is made
    With wanton Paris sleeps-and that's the quarrel.
    To Tenedos they come,
    And the deep-drawing barks do there disgorge
    Sperr up the sons of Troy.
    On one and other side, Troyan and Greek,
    Sets all on hazard-and hither am I come
    Leaps o'er the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,
    Beginning in the middle; starting thence away,
    Now good or bad, 'tis but the chance of war.
    Why should I war without the walls of Troy
  TROILUS. The Greeks are strong, and skilful to their strength,
    Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness valiant;
    Less valiant than the virgin in the night,
    I'll not meddle nor make no farther. He that will have a cake
    out of the wheat must needs tarry the grinding.
  PANDARUS. Ay, the grinding; but you must tarry the bolting.
  PANDARUS. Ay, the bolting; but you must tarry the leavening.
  PANDARUS. Ay, to the leavening; but here's yet in the word
    'hereafter' the kneading, the making of the cake, the heating
    of the oven, and the baking; nay, you must stay the cooling too,
    So, traitor, then she comes when she is thence.
  TROILUS. I was about to tell thee: when my heart,
    Lest Hector or my father should perceive me,
    I have, as when the sun doth light a storm,
    go to- there were no more comparison between the women. But, for
    my part, she is my kinswoman; I would not, as they term it,
  TROILUS. O Pandarus! I tell thee, Pandarus-
    When I do tell thee there my hopes lie drown'd,
    They lie indrench'd. I tell thee I am mad
    Pourest in the open ulcer of my heart-
    Writing their own reproach; to whose soft seizure
    Hard as the palm of ploughman! This thou tell'st me,
    she be fair, 'tis the better for her; an she be not, she has the
  PANDARUS. Because she's kin to me, therefore she's not so fair as
  PANDARUS. I do not care whether you do or no. She's a fool to stay
    behind her father. Let her to the Greeks; and so I'll tell her
    the next time I see her. For my part, I'll meddle nor make no
    as I found it, and there an end.               Exit. Sound alarum
    Her bed is India; there she lies, a pearl;
    Let it be call'd the wild and wand'ring flood;
    Ourself the merchant, and this sailing Pandar
  TROILUS. Because not there. This woman's answer sorts,
    For womanish it is to be from thence.
    What news, Aeneas, from the field to-day?
    But to the sport abroad. Are you bound thither?
  TROILUS. Come, go we then together.                          Exeunt
  CRESSIDA. And whither go they?
  ALEXANDER. Up to the eastern tower,
    Whose height commands as subject all the vale,
    To see the battle. Hector, whose patience
    And, like as there were husbandry in war,
    Before the sun rose he was harness'd light,
    And to the field goes he; where every flower
  ALEXANDER. The noise goes, this: there is among the Greeks
  CRESSIDA. So do all men, unless they are drunk, sick, or have no
  ALEXANDER. This man, lady, hath robb'd many beasts of their
    particular additions: he is as valiant as a lion, churlish as the
    bear, slow as the elephant-a man into whom nature hath so crowded
    it; he is melancholy without cause and merry against the hair; he
    hath the joints of every thing; but everything so out of joint
  ALEXANDER. They say he yesterday cop'd Hector in the battle and
    struck him down, the disdain and shame whereof hath ever since
  ALEXANDER. As may be in the world, lady.
  PANDARUS. True, he was so; I know the cause too; he'll lay about
    him today, I can tell them that. And there's Troilus will not
    come far behind him; let them take heed of Troilus, I can tell
    them that too.
  PANDARUS. Who, Troilus? Troilus is the better man of the two.
  CRESSIDA. O Jupiter! there's no comparison.
  CRESSIDA. 'Tis just to each of them: he is himself.
    Well, the gods are above; time must friend or end. Well, Troilus,
  PANDARUS. Th' other's not come to't; you shall tell me another tale
    when th' other's come to't. Hector shall not have his wit this
    other day that Troilus, for a brown favour, for so 'tis, I must
    confess- not brown neither-
  CRESSIDA. To say the truth, true and not true.
    enough, and the other higher, is too flaming praise for a good
  PANDARUS. Nay, I am sure she does. She came to him th' other day
    into the compass'd window-and you know he has not past three or
    particulars therein to a total.
    lift as much as his brother Hector.
  PANDARUS. Why, go to, then! But to prove to you that Helen loves
  CRESSIDA. Troilus will stand to the proof, if you'll prove it so.
  CRESSIDA. Without the rack.
  PANDARUS. But there was such laughing! Queen Hecuba laugh'd that
  CRESSIDA. But there was a more temperate fire under the pot of her
  PANDARUS. Marry, at the white hair that Helen spied on Troilus'
  PANDARUS. They laugh'd not so much at the hair as at his pretty
    and one of them is white.'
    hairs,' quoth he 'and one white. That white hair is my father,
    and all the rest are his sons.' 'Jupiter!' quoth she 'which of
    these hairs is Paris my husband?' 'The forked one,' quoth he,
    'pluck't out and give it him.' But there was such laughing! and
    Helen so blush'd, and Paris so chaf'd; and all the rest so
  PANDARUS. Hark! they are coming from the field. Shall we stand up
    here and see them as they pass toward Ilium? Good niece, do,
    most bravely. I'll tell you them all by their names as they pass
    by; but mark Troilus above the rest.
  PANDARUS. That's Aeneas. Is not that a brave man? He's one of the
  CRESSIDA. Will he give you the nod?
  CRESSIDA. If he do, the rich shall have more.
  PANDARUS. That's Hector, that, that, look you, that; there's a
    there. There's no jesting; there's laying on; take't off who
    will, as they say. There be hacks.
  PANDARUS. Swords! anything, he cares not; an the devil come to him,
    where Troilus is. Hark! do you not hear the people cry 'Troilus'?
    man, niece. Hem! Brave Troilus, the prince of chivalry!
    porridge after meat! I could live and die in the eyes of Troilus.
    Ne'er look, ne'er look; the eagles are gone. Crows and daws,
    crows and daws! I had rather be such a man as Troilus than
  CRESSIDA. There is amongst the Greeks Achilles, a better man than
    liberality, and such like, the spice and salt that season a man?
  CRESSIDA. Ay, a minc'd man; and then to be bak'd with no date in
    the pie, for then the man's date is out.
    defend my beauty; and you, to defend all these; and at all these
  CRESSIDA. Nay, I'll watch you for that; and that's one of the
    chiefest of them too. If I cannot ward what I would not have hit,
    I can watch you for telling how I took the blow; unless it swell
    past hiding, and then it's past watching
  PANDARUS. You are such another!
  BOY. At your own house; there he unarms him.
  CRESSIDA. By the same token, you are a bawd.
    He offers in another's enterprise;
    Than in the glass of Pandar's praise may be,
    Things won are done; joy's soul lies in the doing.
    Men prize the thing ungain'd more than it is.
Sennet. Enter AGAMEMNON, NESTOR, ULYSSES, DIOMEDES, MENELAUS, and others
    What grief hath set these jaundies o'er your cheeks?
    Fails in the promis'd largeness; checks and disasters
    Grow in the veins of actions highest rear'd,
    As knots, by the conflux of meeting sap,
    Infects the sound pine, and diverts his grain
    Bias and thwart, not answering the aim,
    And that unbodied figure of the thought
    That gave't surmised shape. Why then, you princes,
    And call them shames, which are, indeed, nought else
    But the protractive trials of great Jove
    In fortune's love? For then the bold and coward,
    The wise and fool, the artist and unread,
    But in the wind and tempest of her frown
    Puffing at all, winnows the light away;
    Thy latest words. In the reproof of chance
    Lies the true proof of men. The sea being smooth,
    Upon her patient breast, making their way
    But let the ruffian Boreas once enrage
    Bounding between the two moist elements
    Like Perseus' horse. Where's then the saucy boat,
    Co-rivall'd greatness? Either to harbour fled
    The herd hath more annoyance by the breeze
    Than by the tiger; but when the splitting wind
    Makes flexible the knees of knotted oaks,
    And flies fled under shade-why, then the thing of courage
    In whom the tempers and the minds of all
    Besides the applause and approbation
    As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece
    Should with a bond of air, strong as the axle-tree
    On which heaven rides, knit all the Greekish ears
    And the great Hector's sword had lack'd a master,
    But for these instances:
    When that the general is not like the hive,
    To whom the foragers shall all repair,
    Th' unworthiest shows as fairly in the mask.
    The heavens themselves, the planets, and this centre,
    And therefore is the glorious planet Sol
    Amidst the other, whose med'cinable eye
    Corrects the ill aspects of planets evil,
    And posts, like the commandment of a king,
    Sans check, to good and bad. But when the planets
    What raging of the sea, shaking of earth,
    Commotion in the winds! Frights, changes, horrors,
    Quite from their fixture! O, when degree is shak'd,
    Which is the ladder of all high designs,
    Degrees in schools, and brotherhoods in cities,
    But by degree, stand in authentic place?
    In mere oppugnancy: the bounded waters
    Should lift their bosoms higher than the shores,
    And the rude son should strike his father dead;
    Force should be right; or, rather, right and wrong-
    Should lose their names, and so should justice too.
    Follows the choking.
    By him one step below, he by the next,
    Exampl'd by the first pace that is sick
  AGAMEMNON. The nature of the sickness found, Ulysses,
    What is the remedy?
    The sinew and the forehand of our host,
    Upon a lazy bed the livelong day
    To hear the wooden dialogue and sound
    'Twixt his stretch'd footing and the scaffoldage-
    Which, from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropp'd,
    That's done-as near as the extremest ends
    And then, forsooth, the faint defects of age
    Must be the scene of mirth: to cough and spit
    Shake in and out the rivet. And at this sport
    Excitements to the field or speech for truce,
    As stuff for these two to make paradoxes.
  NESTOR. And in the imitation of these twain-
    Count wisdom as no member of the war,
    When fitness calls them on, and know, by measure
    Of their observant toil, the enemies' weight-
    So that the ram that batters down the wall,
    For the great swinge and rudeness of his poise,
    They place before his hand that made the engine,
    Or those that with the fineness of their souls
    Fore all the Greekish heads, which with one voice
    Know them from eyes of other mortals?
    And bid the cheek be ready with a blush
    Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?
  AGAMEMNON. This Troyan scorns us, or the men of Troy
    As bending angels; that's their fame in peace.
    But when they would seem soldiers, they have galls,
    If that the prais'd himself bring the praise forth;
    But what the repining enemy commends,
    To set his sense on the attentive bent,
    And then to speak.
  AGAMEMNON. Speak frankly as the wind;
    He tells thee so himself.
    Send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents;
    A prince called Hector-Priam is his father-
    If there be one among the fair'st of Greece
    In other arms than hers-to him this challenge.
    If none of them have soul in such a kind,
    We left them all at home. But we are soldiers;
    If then one is, or hath, or means to be,
    But if there be not in our Grecian mould
    And in my vantbrace put this wither'd brawn,
    As may be in the world. His youth in flood,
    And find the welcome of a noble foe.
  ULYSSES. This challenge that the gallant Hector sends,
    And, in the publication, make no strain
  ULYSSES. And wake him to the answer, think you?
    For here the Troyans taste our dear'st repute
    With their fin'st palate; and trust to me, Ulysses,
    In this vile action; for the success,
    Of good or bad unto the general;
    To their subsequent volumes, there is seen
    The baby figure of the giant mas
    To steel a strong opinion to themselves?
    Directive by the limbs.
    And think perchance they'll sell; if not, the lustre
    Of the better yet to show shall show the better,
    By showing the worst first. Do not consent
  NESTOR. I see them not with my old eyes. What are they?
    Than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes,
    Why, then we do our main opinion crush
    Give him allowance for the better man;
    For that will physic the great Myrmidon,
    If the dull brainless Ajax come safe off,
    And I will give a taste thereof forthwith
    Two curs shall tame each other: pride alone
    Must tarre the mastiffs on, as 'twere their bone.          Exeunt
  THERSITES. And those boils did run-say so. Did not the general run
    then? Were not that a botchy core?
  THERSITES. Then there would come some matter from him;
  AJAX. Thou bitch-wolf's son, canst thou not hear? Feel, then.
  THERSITES. The plague of Greece upon thee, thou mongrel beef-witted
  AJAX. Speak, then, thou whinid'st leaven, speak. I will beat thee
  THERSITES. I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness; but I
  AJAX. Toadstool, learn me the proclamation.
  THERSITES. I would thou didst itch from head to foot and I had the
    scratching of thee; I would make thee the loathsomest scab in
    Greece. When thou art forth in the incursions, thou strikest as
    slow as another.
  AJAX. I say, the proclamation.
  THERSITES. He would pun thee into shivers with his fist, as a
    brain than I have in mine elbows; an assinico may tutor thee. You
    How now, Thersites! What's the matter, man?
  THERSITES. You see him there, do you?
  ACHILLES. Ay; what's the matter?
  ACHILLES. So I do. What's the matter?
  AJAX. Therefore I beat thee.
    his pia mater is not worth the ninth part of a sparrow. This
  THERSITES. As will stop the eye of Helen's needle, for whom he
  THERSITES. I would have peace and quietness, but the fool will not-
    he there; that he; look you there.
  THERSITES. No, I warrant you, the fool's will shame it.
  ACHILLES. What's the quarrel?
  AJAX. I bade the vile owl go learn me the tenour of the
  THERSITES. I serve thee not.
    man is beaten voluntary. Ajax was here the voluntary, and you as
    sinews, or else there be liars. Hector shall have a great catch
    an he knock out either of your brains: 'a were as good crack a
    your grandsires had nails on their toes-yoke you like draught
    oxen, and make you plough up the wars.
    to your tents. I will keep where there is wit stirring, and leave
    the faction of fools.                                        Exit
    That Hector, by the fifth hour of the sun,
  ACHILLES. I know not; 'tis put to lott'ry. Otherwise. He knew his
    Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks:
  HECTOR. Though no man lesser fears the Greeks than I,
    More spongy to suck in the sense of fear,
    The beacon of the wise, the tent that searches
    To th' bottom of the worst. Let Helen go.
    Since the first sword was drawn about this question,
    Every tithe soul 'mongst many thousand dismes
    Had it our name, the value of one ten,
  TROILUS. Fie, fie, my brother!
    Weigh you the worth and honour of a king,
    So great as our dread father's, in a scale
    You are so empty of them. Should not our father
    Bear the great sway of his affairs with reasons,
  TROILUS. You are for dreams and slumbers, brother priest;
    And reason flies the object of all harm.
    Who marvels, then, when Helenus beholds
    Should have hare hearts, would they but fat their thoughts
  HECTOR. Brother, she is not worth what she doth, cost
    As in the prizer. 'Tis mad idolatry
    To make the service greater than the god-I
    And the will dotes that is attributive
    Is led on in the conduct of my will;
    Two traded pilots 'twixt the dangerous shores
    We turn not back the silks upon the merchant
    When we have soil'd them; nor the remainder viands
    Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks;
    And did him service. He touch'd the ports desir'd;
    And for an old aunt whom the Greeks held captive
    Wrinkles Apollo's, and makes stale the morning.
    Beggar the estimation which you priz'd
    Richer than sea and land? O theft most base,
    That in their country did them that disgrace
    And I will fill them with prophetic tears.
    Our firebrand brother, Paris, burns us all.
  HECTOR. Now, youthful Troilus, do not these high strains
    Can qualify the same?
  TROILUS. Why, brother Hector,
    We may not think the justness of each act
    Such and no other than event doth form it;
    Nor once deject the courage of our minds
    Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel
    And Jove forbid there should be done amongst us
    Such things as might offend the weakest spleen
  PARIS. Else might the world convince of levity
    But I attest the gods, your full consent
    For what, alas, can these my single arms?
    To stand the push and enmity of those
    Were I alone to pass the difficulties,
    Nor faint in the pursuit.
    You have the honey still, but these the gall;
    But I would have the soil of her fair rape
    What treason were it to the ransack'd queen,
    There's not the meanest spirit on our party
    Where Helen is the subject. Then, I say,
    And on the cause and question now in hand
    To the hot passion of distemp'red blood
    Have ears more deaf than adders to the voice
    All dues be rend'red to their owners. Now,
    Than wife is to the husband? If this law
    To their benumbed wills, resist the same;
    If Helen, then, be wife to Sparta's king-
    As it is known she is-these moral laws
    Is this, in way of truth. Yet, ne'er the less,
  TROILUS. Why, there you touch'd the life of our design.
    Than the performance of our heaving spleens,
    She is a theme of honour and renown,
    As smiles upon the forehead of this action
    For the wide world's revenue.
    The dull and factious nobles of the Greeks
    Will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits.
    I was advertis'd their great general slept,
    Whilst emulation in the army crept.
The Grecian camp. Before the tent of ACHILLES
  THERSITES. How now, Thersites! What, lost in the labyrinth of thy
    fury? Shall the elephant Ajax carry it thus? He beats me, and I
    rail at him. O worthy satisfaction! Would it were otherwise: that
    execrations. Then there's Achilles, a rare engineer! If Troy be
    not taken till these two undermine it, the walls will stand till
    they fall of themselves. O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus,
    forget that thou art Jove, the king of gods, and, Mercury, lose
    all the serpentine craft of thy caduceus, if ye take not that
    little little less-than-little wit from them that they have!
    drawing their massy irons and cutting the web. After this, the
    vengeance on the whole camp! or, rather, the Neapolitan
    bone-ache! for that, methinks, is the curse depending on those
  PATROCLUS. Who's there? Thersites! Good Thersites, come in and
    and ignorance, be thine in great revenue! Heaven bless thee from
    a tutor, and discipline come not near thee! Let thy blood be thy
    direction till thy death. Then if she that lays thee out says
  THERSITES. Ay, the heavens hear me!
  ACHILLES. Who's there?
  PATROCLUS. Thy lord, Thersites. Then tell me, I pray thee, what's
  THERSITES. I'll decline the whole question. Agamemnon commands
  THERSITES. Make that demand of the Creator. It suffices me thou
    All the argument is a whore and a cuckold-a good quarrel to draw
    emulous factions and bleed to death upon. Now the dry serpigo on
    the subject, and war and lechery confound all!               Exit
    We dare not move the question of our place
  ULYSSES. We saw him at the opening of his tent.
    melancholy, if you will favour the man; but, by my head, 'tis
  NESTOR. All the better; their fraction is more our wish than their
    To call upon him; he hopes it is no other
    We are too well acquainted with these answers;
    Much attribute he hath, and much the reason
    Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss;
    Than in the note of judgment; and worthier than himself
    Here tend the savage strangeness he puts on,
    Disguise the holy strength of their command,
    Bring action hither; this cannot go to war.
  AJAX. What is he more than another?
    no less noble, much more gentle, and altogether more tractable.
  AGAMEMNON. Your mind is the clearer, Ajax, and your virtues the
    but in the deed devours the deed in the praise.
  AJAX. I do hate a proud man as I do hate the engend'ring of toads.
  ULYSSES. Achilles will not to the field to-morrow.
    But carries on the stream of his dispose,
    Untent his person and share the air with us?
    He is so plaguy proud that the death tokens of it
    We'll consecrate the steps that Ajax makes
    When they go from Achilles. Shall the proud lord
    And never suffers matter of the world
  NESTOR. [Aside] O, this is well! He rubs the vein of him.
  AJAX. If I go to him, with my armed fist I'll pash him o'er the
  ULYSSES. Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel.
  AGAMEMNON. [Aside] He will be the physician that should be the
  ULYSSES. Know the whole world, he is as valiant.
  ULYSSES. Thank the heavens, lord, thou art of sweet composure
    Praise him that gat thee, she that gave thee suck;
    Instructed by the antiquary times-
    But pardon, father Nestor, were your days
    You should not have the eminence of him,
  AJAX. Shall I call you father?
  ULYSSES. There is no tarrying here; the hart Achilles
    To call together all his state of war;
    And cull their flower, Ajax shall cope the best.
  PANDARUS. Friend, you-pray you, a word. Do you not follow the young
  SERVANT. Sir, I do depend upon the lord.
  PANDARUS. Friend, know me better: I am the Lord Pandarus.
  SERVANT. You are in the state of grace.
  PANDARUS. Know you the musicians?
  PANDARUS. Who play they to?
  SERVANT. To the hearers, sir.
  SERVANT. At mine, sir, and theirs that love music.
  PANDARUS. Friend, we understand not one another: I am to courtly,
    and thou art too cunning. At whose request do these men play?
  SERVANT. That's to't, indeed, sir. Marry, sir, at the request of
    Paris my lord, who is there in person; with him the mortal Venus,
    the heart-blood of beauty, love's invisible soul-
  PANDARUS. It should seem, fellow, that thou hast not seen the Lady
    Cressida. I come to speak with Paris from the Prince Troilus; I
    seethes.
    Fair desires, in all fair measure, fairly guide them- especially
    brother Troilus-
    lord, he desires you that, if the King call for him at supper,
  PANDARUS. He! No, she'll none of him; they two are twain.
  HELEN. Falling in, after falling out, may make them three.
  HELEN. Ay, ay, prithee now. By my troth, sweet lord, thou hast a
    But tickles still the sore.
    These lovers cry, O ho, they die!
       Yet that which seems the wound to kill
  HELEN. In love, i' faith, to the very tip of the nose.
  PANDARUS. Is this the generation of love: hot blood, hot thoughts,
    and hot deeds? Why, they are vipers. Is love a generation of
  PARIS. Hector, Deiphobus, Helenus, Antenor, and all the gallantry
    have it so. How chance my brother Troilus went not?
  HELEN. He hangs the lip at something. You know all, Lord Pandarus.
  PANDARUS. Not I, honey-sweet queen. I long to hear how they spend
    to-day. You'll remember your brother's excuse?
  PARIS. They're come from the field. Let us to Priam's hall
    To greet the warriors. Sweet Helen, I must woo you
    With these your white enchanting fingers touch'd,
    Shall more obey than to the edge of steel
    Than all the island kings-disarm great Hector.
  PARIS. Sweet, above thought I love thee.                     Exeunt
  BOY. No, sir; he stays for you to conduct him thither.
    Like a strange soul upon the Stygian banks
    And give me swift transportance to these fields
    Where I may wallow in the lily beds
    Propos'd for the deserver! O gentle Pandar,
    When that the wat'ry palate tastes indeed
    For the capacity of my ruder powers.
    As doth a battle, when they charge on heaps
    if she were fray'd with a sprite. I'll fetch her. It is the
    And all my powers do their bestowing lose,
    is now; swear the oaths now to her that you have sworn to me.-
    Alas the day, how loath you are to offend daylight! An 'twere
    dark, you'd close sooner. So, so; rub on, and kiss the mistress
    How now, a kiss in fee-farm! Build there, carpenter; the air is
    falcon as the tercel, for all the ducks i' th' river. Go to, go
    What, billing again? Here's 'In witness whereof the parties
  TROILUS. What should they grant? What makes this pretty abruption?
    What too curious dreg espies my sweet lady in the fountain of our
  TROILUS. Fears make devils of cherubims; they never see truly.
    than blind reason stumbling without fear. To fear the worst oft
    cures the worse.
    there is presented no monster.
  CRESSIDA. Nor nothing monstrous neither?
    difficulty imposed. This is the monstruosity in love, lady, that
    the will is infinite, and the execution confin'd; that the desire
    is boundless, and the act a slave to limit.
  CRESSIDA. They say all lovers swear more performance than they are
    able, and yet reserve an ability that they never perform; vowing
    more than the perfection of ten, and discharging less than the
    tenth part of one. They that have the voice of lions and the act
    of hares, are they not monsters?
  TROILUS. Are there such? Such are not we. Praise us as we are
    they be long ere they are wooed, they are constant being won;
    they are burs, I can tell you; they'll stick where they are
  TROILUS. Why was my Cressid then so hard to win?
    With the first glance that ever-pardon me.
    If I confess much, you will play the tyrant.
    Too headstrong for their mother. See, we fools!
  TROILUS. And shall, albeit sweet music issues thence.
    To be another's fool. I would be gone.
  TROILUS. Well know they what they speak that speak so wisely.
    Might be affronted with the match and weight
    How were I then uplifted! but, alas,
    And simpler than the infancy of truth.
    True swains in love shall in the world to come
    Approve their truth by Troilus, when their rhymes,
    As true as steel, as plantage to the moon,
    As truth's authentic author to be cited,
    'As true as Troilus' shall crown up the verse
    And sanctify the numbers.
    When waterdrops have worn the stones of Troy,
    Pard to the hind, or stepdame to her son'-
    Yea, let them say, to stick the heart of falsehood,
  PANDARUS. Go to, a bargain made; seal it, seal it; I'll be the
    prove false one to another, since I have taken such pains to
    bring you together, let all pitiful goers- between be call'd to
    the world's end after my name-call them all Pandars; let all
  CALCHAS. Now, Princes, for the service I have done,
    Th' advantage of the time prompts me aloud
    That, through the sight I bear in things to come,
    As new into the world, strange, unacquainted-
    Oft have you-often have you thanks therefore-
    I know, is such a wrest in their affairs
    That their negotiations all must slack
    Wanting his manage; and they will almost
    And bring us Cressid hither. Calchas shall have
           ACHILLES and PATROCLUS stand in their tent
    It may do good. Pride hath no other glass
    Feed arrogance and are the proud man's fees.
    So do each lord; and either greet him not,
    Than if not look'd on. I will lead the way.
  ACHILLES. What comes the general to speak with me?
  NESTOR. Would you, my lord, aught with the general?
  ACHILLES. What, does the cuckold scorn me?
  ACHILLES. What mean these fellows? Know they not Achilles?
    To send their smiles before them to Achilles,
    To come as humbly as they us'd to creep
    Must fall out with men too. What the declin'd is,
    He shall as soon read in the eyes of others
    Show not their mealy wings but to the summer;
    Which when they fall, as being slippery standers,
    The love that lean'd on them as slippery too,
    Doth one pluck down another, and together
    Die in the fall. But 'tis not so with me:
    Save these men's looks; who do, methinks, find out
    As they have often given. Here is Ulysses.
    As when his virtues shining upon others
    Heat them, and they retort that heat again
    To the first giver.
    The beauty that is borne here in the face
    To others' eyes; nor doth the eye itself-
    Salutes each other with each other's form;
    Till it hath travell'd, and is mirror'd there
  ULYSSES. I do not strain at the position-
    It is familiar-but at the author's drift;
    That no man is the lord of anything,
    Though in and of him there be much consisting,
    Till he communicate his parts to others;
    Nor doth he of himself know them for aught
    Till he behold them formed in th' applause
    Fronting the sun, receives and renders back
    Th' unknown Ajax. Heavens, what a man is there!
    Nature, what things there are
    What things again most dear in the esteem
    Whiles others play the idiots in her eyes!
    How one man eats into another's pride,
    To see these Grecian lords!-why, even already
    They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder,
  ACHILLES. I do believe it; for they pass'd by me
    As misers do by beggars-neither gave to me
    As fast as they are made, forgot as soon
    In monumental mock'ry. Take the instant way;
    Where one but goes abreast. Keep then the path,
    Or hedge aside from the direct forthright,
    Like to an ent'red tide they all rush by
    Lie there for pavement to the abject rear,
    O'er-run and trampled on. Then what they do in present,
    Grasps in the corner. The welcome ever smiles,
    Remuneration for the thing it was;
    One touch of nature makes the whole world kin-
    Though they are made and moulded of things past,
    The present eye praises the present object.
    That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax,
    Since things in motion sooner catch the eye
    Than what stirs not. The cry went once on thee,
    Whose glorious deeds but in these fields of late
    Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves,
    Keeps place with thought, and almost, like the gods,
    Do thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles.
    Durst never meddle-in the soul of state,
    All the commerce that you have had with Troy
    And all the Greekish girls shall tripping sing
    The fool slides o'er the ice that you should break.          Exit
    They think my little stomach to the war
    Sweet, rouse yourself; and the weak wanton Cupid
    And, like a dew-drop from the lion's mane,
  PATROCLUS. O, then, beware:
    Those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves;
    Even then when they sit idly in the sun.
  ACHILLES. Go call Thersites hither, sweet Patroclus.
    I'll send the fool to Ajax, and desire him
    T' invite the Troyan lords, after the combat,
  THERSITES. Ajax goes up and down the field asking for himself.
    'twould out'; and so there is; but it lies as coldly in him as
    of this man that takes me for the general? He's grown a very land
    wear it on both sides, like leather jerkin.
    to me, you shall see the pageant of Ajax.
  ACHILLES. To him, Patroclus. Tell him I humbly desire the valiant
    Ajax to invite the most valorous Hector to come unarm'd to my
    tent; and to procure safe conduct for his person of the
    Captain General of the Grecian army, et cetera, Agamemnon. Do
  PATROCLUS. I come from the worthy Achilles-
  THERSITES. If to-morrow be a fair day, by eleven of the clock it
    will go one way or other. Howsoever, he shall pay for me ere he
    none; unless the fiddler Apollo get his sinews to make catlings
  THERSITES. Let me carry another to his horse; for that's the more
    And I myself see not the bottom of it.
  THERSITES. Would the fountain of your mind were clear again, that I
    might water an ass at it. I had rather be a tick in a sheep than
Enter, at one side, AENEAS, and servant with a torch; at another,
PARIS, DEIPHOBUS, ANTENOR, DIOMEDES the Grecian, and others, with torches
  PARIS. See, ho! Who is that there?
  DEIPHOBUS. It is the Lord Aeneas.
  AENEAS. Is the Prince there in person?
    Witness the process of your speech, wherein
    Did haunt you in the field.
    During all question of the gentle truce;
  DIOMEDES. The one and other Diomed embraces.
    By Jove, I'll play the hunter for thy life
    If to my sword his fate be not the glory,
    A thousand complete courses of the sun!
  AENEAS. We know each other well.
  DIOMEDES.We do; and long to know each other worse.
  PARIS. This is the most despiteful'st gentle greeting
  AENEAS. I was sent for to the King; but why, I know not.
    To Calchas' house, and there to render him,
    For the enfreed Antenor, the fair Cressid.
    Haste there before us. I constantly believe-
    Or rather call my thought a certain knowledge-
    My brother Troilus lodges there to-night.
    With the whole quality wherefore; I fear
    Troilus had rather Troy were borne to Greece
    The bitter disposition of the time
    Even in the soul of sound good-fellowship-
    Not palating the taste of her dishonour,
    But he as he, the heavier for a whore.
    Dispraise the thing that you desire to buy;
  TROILUS. Dear, trouble not yourself; the morn is cold.
    He shall unbolt the gates.
  CRESSIDA. Good morrow, then.
  TROILUS. I prithee now, to bed.
  TROILUS. O Cressida! but that the busy day,
    Wak'd by the lark, hath rous'd the ribald crows,
    I would not from thee.
  TROILUS. Beshrew the witch! with venomous wights she stays
    As tediously as hell, but flies the grasps of love
  CRESSIDA. Prithee tarry.
    And then you would have tarried. Hark! there's one up.
  PANDARUS. [Within] What's all the doors open here?
    You bring me to do, and then you flout me too.
    Nor suffer others.
    How earnestly they knock! Pray you come in:
  PANDARUS. Who's there? What's the matter? Will you beat down the
    door? How now? What's the matter?
  PANDARUS. Who's there? My lord Aeneas? By my troth,
  AENEAS. Who!-nay, then. Come, come, you'll do him wrong ere you are
    know of him, but yet go fetch him hither; go.
  TROILUS. How now! What's the matter?
    Paris your brother, and Deiphobus,
    Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
  AENEAS. By Priam, and the general state of Troy.
    I will go meet them; and, my lord Aeneas,
  AENEAS. Good, good, my lord, the secrets of neighbour Pandar
    would they had broke's neck.
  CRESSIDA. How now! What's the matter? Who was here?
    me, sweet uncle, what's the matter?
  PANDARUS. Would I were as deep under the earth as I am above!
  CRESSIDA. O the gods! What's the matter?
  PANDARUS. Pray thee, get thee in. Would thou hadst ne'er been born!
    what's the matter?
    chang'd for Antenor; thou must to thy father, and be gone from
  CRESSIDA. I will not, uncle. I have forgot my father;
    As the sweet Troilus. O you gods divine,
    Make Cressid's name the very crown of falsehood,
    But the strong base and building of my love
    Is as the very centre of the earth,
  PARIS. It is great morning; and the hour prefix'd
    Comes fast upon. Good my brother Troilus,
    Tell you the lady what she is to do
    And haste her to the purpose.
    I'll bring her to the Grecian presently;
    Think it an altar, and thy brother Troilus
    A priest, there off'ring to it his own heart.                Exit
    heart,' as the goodly saying is,
  TROILUS. Cressid, I love thee in so strain'd a purity
    That the bless'd gods, as angry with my fancy,
    More bright in zeal than the devotion which
    Cold lips blow to their deities, take thee from me.
  CRESSIDA. Have the gods envy?
    Even in the birth of our own labouring breath.
    Did buy each other, must poorly sell ourselves
    With the rude brevity and discharge of one.
    With distinct breath and consign'd kisses to them,
    Distasted with the salt of broken tears.
  AENEAS. [Within] My lord, is the lady ready?
  TROILUS. Hark! you are call'd. Some say the Genius so
    Bid them have patience; she shall come anon.
  CRESSIDA. I must then to the Grecians?
  CRESSIDA. A woeful Cressid 'mongst the merry Greeks!
    I speak not 'Be thou true' as fearing thee,
    That there's no maculation in thy heart;
    And I will see thee.
  TROILUS. I will corrupt the Grecian sentinels
    To give thee nightly visitation.
  TROILUS. Die I a villain, then!
    Nor heel the high lavolt, nor sweeten talk,
    To which the Grecians are most prompt and pregnant;
    But I can tell that in each grace of these
    When we will tempt the frailty of our powers,
    Presuming on their changeful potency.
  PARIS. [Within] Brother Troilus!
  TROILUS. Good brother, come you hither;
    And bring Aeneas and the Grecian with you.
    Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
    Whilst some with cunning gild their copper crowns,
    Fear not my truth: the moral of my wit
    Is 'plain and true'; there's all the reach of it.
    Welcome, Sir Diomed! Here is the lady
    At the port, lord, I'll give her to thy hand,
    And by the way possess thee what she is.
    So please you, save the thanks this prince expects.
    To shame the zeal of my petition to the
    In praising her. I tell thee, lord of Greece,
    I charge thee use her well, even for my charge;
    For, by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not,
    Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard,
  TROILUS. Come, to the port. I'll tell thee, Diomed,
    This brave shall oft make thee to hide thy head.
    That swore to ride before him to the field.
NESTOR, and others
    Thou dreadful Ajax, that the appalled air
    May pierce the head of the great combatant,
    And hale him hither.
  AJAX. Thou, trumpet, there's my purse.
    Out-swell the colic of puff Aquilon'd.
  ULYSSES. 'Tis he, I ken the manner of his gait:
    He rises on the toe. That spirit of his
    In aspiration lifts him from the earth.
  AGAMEMNON. Is this the lady Cressid?
  AGAMEMNON. Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet lady.
  ULYSSES. Yet is the kindness but particular;
  ULYSSES. O deadly gall, and theme of all our scorns!
  CRESSIDA. Why, beg then.
  ULYSSES. Why then, for Venus' sake give me a kiss
  ULYSSES. Never's my day, and then a kiss of you.
  DIOMEDES. Lady, a word. I'll bring you to your father.
    O these encounters so glib of tongue
    And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts
    To every ticklish reader! Set them down
    And daughters of the game.                       [Trumpet within]
                 and other Trojans, with attendants
  AGAMEMNON. Yonder comes the troop.
  AENEAS. Hail, all the state of Greece! What shall be done
    A victor shall be known? Will you the knights
    Shall to the edge of all extremity
    Pursue each other, or shall they be divided
    By any voice or order of the field?
    In the extremity of great and little
    Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector;
    The other blank as nothing. Weigh him well,
  ACHILLES. A maiden battle then? O, I perceive you!
    Consent upon the order of their fight,
    So be it; either to the uttermost,
    Half stints their strife before their strokes begin.
                                    [AJAX and HECTOR enter the lists]
    Thus says Aeneas, one that knows the youth
    Awake thee.
  HECTOR. Why, then will I no more.
    Thou art, great lord, my father's sister's son,
    And this is Troyan; the sinews of this leg
    All Greek, and this all Troy; my mother's blood
    Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister
    Bounds in my father's'; by Jove multipotent,
    Of our rank feud; but the just gods gainsay
    That any drop thou borrow'dst from thy mother,
    Be drained! Let me embrace thee, Ajax.
    Hector would have them fall upon him thus.
    Cousin, all honour to thee!
  AJAX. I thank thee, Hector.
    I came to kill thee, cousin, and bear hence
  AENEAS. There is expectance here from both the sides
    What further you will do.
    As seld I have the chance, I would desire
    Doth long to see unarm'd the valiant Hector.
  HECTOR. Aeneas, call my brother Troilus to me,
    To the expecters of our Troyan part;
    Desire them home. Give me thy hand, my cousin;
    I will go eat with thee, and see your knights.
        AGAMEMNON and the rest of the Greeks come forward
  HECTOR. The worthiest of them tell me name by name;
    Bids thee with most divine integrity,
  HECTOR. I thank thee, most imperious Agamemnon.
  MENELAUS. Let me confirm my princely brother's greeting.
    You brace of warlike brothers, welcome hither.
    Mock not that I affect the untraded oath;
  MENELAUS. Name her not now, sir; she's a deadly theme.
  NESTOR. I have, thou gallant Troyan, seen thee oft,
    Through ranks of Greekish youth; and I have seen thee,
    Not letting it decline on the declined;
    And I have seen thee pause and take thy breath,
    When that a ring of Greeks have hemm'd thee in,
    But, by great Mars, the captain of us all,
    Never like thee. O, let an old man embrace thee;
  AENEAS. 'Tis the old Nestor.
  HECTOR. Let me embrace thee, good old chronicle,
    Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.
  NESTOR. I would my arms could match thee in contention
    As they contend with thee in courtesy.
  HECTOR. I would they could.
    By this white beard, I'd fight with thee to-morrow.
    Well, welcome, welcome! I have seen the time.
    Ah, sir, there's many a Greek and Troyan dead,
  ULYSSES. Sir, I foretold you then what would ensue.
    Yond towers, whose wanton tops do buss the clouds,
    Must kiss their own feet.
    There they stand yet; and modestly I think
    After the General, I beseech you next
  ACHILLES. I shall forestall thee, Lord Ulysses, thou!
    Now, Hector, I have fed mine eyes on thee;
    I have with exact view perus'd thee, Hector,
  HECTOR. Stand fair, I pray thee; let me look on thee.
  ACHILLES. Thou art too brief. I will the second time,
    As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb.
    But there's more in me than thou understand'st.
    Shall I destroy him? Whether there, or there, or there?
    That I may give the local wound a name,
    And make distinct the very breach whereout
  HECTOR. It would discredit the blest gods, proud man,
  ACHILLES. I tell thee yea.
    I'd not believe thee. Henceforth guard thee well;
    For I'll not kill thee there, nor there, nor there;
    But, by the forge that stithied Mars his helm,
    I'll kill thee everywhere, yea, o'er and o'er.
    But I'll endeavour deeds to match these words,
  AJAX. Do not chafe thee, cousin;
    And you, Achilles, let these threats alone
  HECTOR. I pray you let us see you in the field;
    To-morrow do I meet thee, fell as death;
    There in the full convive we; afterwards,
    Concur together, severally entreat him.
    Beat loud the tambourines, let the trumpets blow,
    In what place of the field doth Calchas keep?
    Who neither looks upon the heaven nor earth,
    On the fair Cressid.
    To bring me thither?
    This Cressida in Troy? Had she no lover there
  TROILUS. O, sir, to such as boasting show their scars
The Grecian camp. Before the tent of ACHILLES
    Patroclus, let us feast him to the height.
    Thou crusty batch of nature, what's the news?
    idiot worshippers, here's a letter for thee.
  PATROCLUS. Who keeps the tent now?
  THERSITES. The surgeon's box or the patient's wound.
  PATROCLUS. Well said, Adversity! and what needs these tricks?
  THERSITES. Prithee, be silent, boy; I profit not by thy talk; thou
  THERSITES. Why, his masculine whore. Now, the rotten diseases of
    the south, the guts-griping ruptures, catarrhs, loads o' gravel
    in the back, lethargies, cold palsies, raw eyes, dirt-rotten
    limekilns i' th' palm, incurable bone-ache, and the rivelled fee-
    simple of the tetter, take and take again such preposterous
  THERSITES. Do I curse thee?
  THERSITES. No! Why art thou, then, exasperate, thou idle immaterial
    thou tassel of a prodigal's purse, thou? Ah, how the poor world is
  THERSITES. With too much blood and too little brain these two may
    run mad; but, if with too much brain and to little blood they do,
    as ear-wax; and the goodly transformation of Jupiter there, his
    brother, the bull, the primitive statue and oblique memorial of
    brother's leg-to what form but that he is, should wit larded with
    not to be the louse of a lazar, so I were not Menelaus. Hey-day!
    There, where we see the lights.
    Ajax commands the guard to tend on you.
  HECTOR. Thanks, and good night to the Greeks' general.
    Brabbler the hound; but when he performs, astronomers foretell
    it: it is prodigious, there will come some change; the sun
    borrows of the moon when Diomed keeps his word. I will rather
    Troyan drab, and uses the traitor Calchas' tent. I'll after.
      Enter TROILUS and ULYSSES, at a distance; after them
  ULYSSES. Stand where the torch may not discover us.
  DIOMEDES. Nay, but do, then;
  DIOMEDES. Nay, then-
  CRESSIDA. I prithee, do not hold me to mine oath;
  TROILUS. I prithee stay.
  TROILUS. Doth that grieve thee? O withered truth!
  CRESSIDA. In faith, I do not. Come hither once again.
  THERSITES. How the devil luxury, with his fat rump and potato
    finger, tickles these together! Fry, lechery, fry!
  DIOMEDES. But will you, then?
  DIOMEDES. Give me some token for the surety of it.
  THERSITES. Now the pledge; now, now, now!
    I prithee, Diomed, visit me no more.
    Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my glove,
    As I kiss thee. Nay, do not snatch it from me;
  TROILUS. Wert thou the devil and wor'st it on thy horn,
  DIOMEDES. Why, then farewell;
  DIOMEDES. Farewell till then.
  CRESSIDA. Good night. I prithee come.                 Exit DIOMEDES
    Troilus, farewell! One eye yet looks on thee;
    But with my heart the other eye doth see.
    What error leads must err; O, then conclude,
  ULYSSES. Why stay we, then?
    But if I tell how these two did coact,
    Sith yet there is a credence in my heart,
    Think, we had mothers; do not give advantage
    To stubborn critics, apt, without a theme,
    For depravation, to square the general sex
    By Cressid's rule. Rather think this not Cressid.
  ULYSSES. What hath she done, Prince, that can soil our mothers?
    If sanctimony be the god's delight,
    If there be rule in unity itself,
    Within my soul there doth conduce a fight
    Divides more wider than the sky and earth;
    And yet the spacious breadth of this division
    Cressid is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven.
    And with another knot, five-finger-tied,
    The fragments, scraps, the bits, and greasy relics
    My sword should bite it. Not the dreadful spout
    Which shipmen do the hurricano call,
    Constring'd in mass by the almighty sun,
    And they'll seem glorious.
    Your passion draws ears hither.
  ULYSSES. I'll bring you to the gates.
    anything for the intelligence of this whore; the parrot will not
    burning devil take them!                                     Exit
    By all the everlasting gods, I'll go.
  ANDROMACHE. My dreams will, sure, prove ominous to the day.
  CASSANDRA. Where is my brother Hector?
  CASSANDRA. No notes of sally, for the heavens, sweet brother!
    Than spotted livers in the sacrifice.
    For we would give much, to use violent thefts
    And rob in the behalf of charity.
  CASSANDRA. It is the purpose that makes strong the vow;
    Mine honour keeps the weather of my fate.
    Life every man holds dear; but the dear man
  ANDROMACHE. Cassandra, call my father to persuade.
    Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong,
    And tempt not yet the brushes of the war.
    Unarm thee, go; and doubt thou not, brave boy,
    I'll stand to-day for thee and me and Troy.
  TROILUS. Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you
  TROILUS. When many times the captive Grecian falls,
    Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword,
    You bid them rise and live.
  TROILUS. For th' love of all the gods,
    Let's leave the hermit Pity with our mother;
    Spur them to ruthful work, rein them from ruth!
  TROILUS. Hector, then 'tis wars.
    Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars
    Nor you, my brother, with your true sword drawn,
    Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
    Fall all together.
    Thy wife hath dreamt; thy mother hath had visions;
    To tell thee that this day is ominous.
    Even in the faith of valour, to appear
    This morning to them.
    You know me dutiful; therefore, dear sir,
  ANDROMACHE. Do not, dear father.
    Upon the love you bear me, get you in.
    Makes all these bodements.
    Like witless antics, one another meet,
    Go in, and cheer the town; we'll forth, and fight,
    Do deeds worth praise and tell you them at night.
  PRIAM. Farewell. The gods with safety stand about thee!
    me, and the foolish fortune of this girl, and what one thing,
    what another, that I shall leave you one o' th's days; and I have
    says she there?
  TROILUS. Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart;
    Th' effect doth operate another way.
                                                 [Tearing the letter]
    Go, wind, to wind, there turn and change together.
    But edifies another with her deeds.              Exeunt severally
The plain between Troy and the Grecian camp
  THERSITES. Now they are clapper-clawing one another; I'll go look
    scurvy doting foolish young knave's sleeve of Troy there in his
    helm. I would fain see them meet, that that same young Troyan ass
    that loves the whore there might send that Greekish whoremasterly
    villain with the sleeve back to the dissembling luxurious drab of
    a sleeve-less errand. A th' t'other side, the policy of those
    against that dog of as bad a kind, Achilles; and now is the cur,
    Ajax prouder than the cur Achilles, and will not arm to-day;
    whereupon the Grecians begin to proclaim barbarism, and policy
    Soft! here comes sleeve, and t'other.
  TROILUS. Fly not; for shouldst thou take the river Styx
    Withdrew me from the odds of multitude.
    Have at thee.
    Troyan-now the sleeve, now the sleeve!
  HECTOR. I do believe thee. Live.                               Exit
    break thy neck for frighting me! What's become of the wenching
    rogues? I think they have swallowed one another. I would laugh at
    them.                                                        Exit
Another part of the plain
    Present the fair steed to my lady Cressid.
    Tell her I have chastis'd the amorous Troyan,
    Upon the pashed corses of the kings
    And bid the snail-pac'd Ajax arm for shame.
    There is a thousand Hectors in the field;
    Now here he fights on Galathe his horse,
    And there lacks work; anon he's there afoot,
    And there they fly or die, like scaled sculls
    Before the belching whale; then is he yonder,
    And there the strawy Greeks, ripe for his edge,
    Fall down before him like the mower's swath.
    Here, there, and everywhere, he leaves and takes;
    Together with his mangled Myrmidons,
  DIOMEDES. Ay, there, there.
  NESTOR. So, so, we draw together.                              Exit
Another part of the plain
  AJAX. Were I the general, thou shouldst have my office
  DIOMEDES. Ha! art thou there?
  HECTOR. Yea, Troilus? O, well fought, my youngest brother!
  ACHILLES. Now do I see thee, ha! Have at thee, Hector!
    My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
  HECTOR. Fare thee well.
    Had I expected thee.
    How now, my brother!
    No, by the flame of yonder glorious heaven,
    I'll frush it and unlock the rivets all
    Why then, fly on; I'll hunt thee for thy hide.             Exeunt
Another part of the plain
    And when I have the bloody Hector found,
    It is decreed Hector the great must die.                   Exeunt
      Enter MENELAUS and PARIS, fighting; then THERSITES
  THERSITES. The cuckold and the cuckold-maker are at it. Now, bull!
    Paris, 'loo! The bull has the game. Ware horns, ho!
    everything illegitimate. One bear will not bite another, and
    wherefore should one bastard? Take heed, the quarrel's most
    ominous to us: if the son of a whore fight for a whore, he tempts
  MARGARELON. The devil take thee, coward!                       Exit
Another part of the plain
  ACHILLES. Look, Hector, how the sun begins to set;
    Even with the vail and dark'ning of the sun,
    To close the day up, Hector's life is done.
  ACHILLES. Strike, fellows, strike; this is the man I seek.
    'Achilles hath the mighty Hector slain.'
  MYRMIDON. The Troyan trumpets sound the like, my lord.
  ACHILLES. The dragon wing of night o'erspreads the earth
    And, stickler-like, the armies separates.
                                                 [Sheathes his sword]
    Along the field I will the Troyan trail.                   Exeunt
Another part of the plain
and the rest, marching
    If in his death the gods have us befriended;
Another part of the plain
  AENEAS. Stand, ho! yet are we masters of the field.
    Never go home; here starve we out the night.
  TROILUS. He's dead, and at the murderer's horse's tail,
    In beastly sort, dragg'd through the shameful field.
  AENEAS. My lord, you do discomfort all the host.
    Address their dangers in. Hector is gone.
    Go in to Troy, and say there 'Hector's dead.'
    Make wells and Niobes of the maids and wives,
    Cold statues of the youth; and, in a word,
    Hector is dead; there is no more to say.
    I'll haunt thee like a wicked conscience still,
    is the poor agent despis'd! traitors and bawds, how earnestly are
    so lov'd, and the performance so loathed? What verse for it? What
          Full merrily the humble-bee doth sing
          Sweet honey and sweet notes together fail.
    Good traders in the flesh, set this in your painted
    Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade,
    Till then I'll sweat and seek about for eases,
  SEBASTIAN, brother of Viola
  VALENTINE, gentleman attending on the Duke
  CURIO, gentleman attending on the Duke
A city in Illyria; and the sea-coast near it
Enter ORSINO, Duke of Illyria, CURIO, and other LORDS; MUSICIANS attending
  DUKE. If music be the food of love, play on,
    O, it came o'er my ear like the sweet sound
    That breathes upon a bank of violets,
    Receiveth as the sea, nought enters there,
  DUKE. Why, so I do, the noblest that I have.
    Methought she purg'd the air of pestilence!
    A brother's dead love, which she would keep fresh
    To pay this debt of love but to a brother,
    How will she love when the rich golden shaft
    Hath kill'd the flock of all affections else
    My brother he is in Elysium.
  VIOLA. O my poor brother! and so perchance may he be.
    Hung on our driving boat, I saw your brother,
    Courage and hope both teaching him the practice-
    To a strong mast that liv'd upon the sea;
    Where, like Arion on the dolphin's back,
    I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves
  VIOLA. For saying so, there's gold.
  VIOLA. Orsino! I have heard my father name him.
    He was a bachelor then.
    And then 'twas fresh in murmur- as, you know,
    What great ones do the less will prattle of-
    That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.
  CAPTAIN. A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count
    That died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her
    In the protection of his son, her brother,
    They say, she hath abjur'd the company
    And might not be delivered to the world,
    No, not the Duke's.
  VIOLA. There is a fair behaviour in thee, Captain;
    Doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee
    I prithee, and I'll pay thee bounteously,
    When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.
  VIOLA. I thank thee. Lead me on.                        Exeunt
  SIR TOBY. What a plague means my niece to take the death of her
    brother thus? I am sure care's an enemy to life.
  MARIA. Ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest limits
    clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too;
    an they be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.
  MARIA. Ay, but he'll have but a year in all these ducats; he's a
    and hath all the good gifts of nature.
    fool, he's a great quarreller; and but that he hath the gift of a
    coward to allay the gust he hath in quarrelling, 'tis thought
    among the prudent he would quickly have the gift of a grave.
  SIR TOBY. By this hand, they are scoundrels and subtractors that
    say so of him. Who are they?
    long as there is a passage in my throat and drink in Illyria.
    Is that the meaning of 'accost'?
  AGUECHEEK. Wherefore, sweetheart? What's your metaphor?
  AGUECHEEK. Are you full of them?
  MARIA. Ay, sir, I have them at my fingers' ends; marry, now I let
    thee so put down?
    that time in the tongues that I have in fencing, dancing, and
    bear-baiting. Oh, had I but followed the arts!
    see a huswife take thee between her legs and spin it off.
    the Count himself here hard by woos her.
    degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit; I have heard her
    swear't. Tut, there's life in't, man.
    altogether.
  SIR TOBY. Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?
  AGUECHEEK. As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the
  SIR TOBY. And I can cut the mutton to't.
  AGUECHEEK. And I think I have the back-trick simply as strong as
  SIR TOBY. Wherefore are these things hid? Wherefore have these
    gifts a curtain before 'em? Are they like to take dust, like
    the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was form'd under the
  SIR TOBY. No, sir; it is legs and thighs. Let me see the caper. Ha,
  VALENTINE. If the Duke continue these favours towards you, Cesario,
  VIOLA. You either fear his humour or my negligence, that you call
    in question the continuance of his love. Is he inconstant, sir,
  VIOLA. I thank you. Here comes the Count.
    To thee the book even of my secret soul.
    And tell them there thy fixed foot shall grow
    Rather than make unprofited return.
  VIOLA. Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?
  DUKE. O, then unfold the passion of my love,
    It shall become thee well to act my woes:
    For they shall yet belie thy happy years
    Is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound,
  MARIA. Nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or I will not open
    lady will hang thee for thy absence.
  MARIA. A good lenten answer. I can tell thee where that saying was
  MARIA. In the wars; and that may you be bold to say in your
  CLOWN. Well, God give them wisdom that have it; and those that are
    fools, let them use their talents.
  MARIA. You are resolute, then?
  CLOWN. Not so, neither; but I am resolv'd on two points.
  MARIA. That if one break, the other will hold; or if both break,
    that think they have thee do very oft prove fools; and I that am
    sure I lack thee may pass for a wise man. For what says
    thee, lady!
  OLIVIA. Take the fool away.
  CLOWN. Do you not hear, fellows? Take away the lady.
    for give the dry fool drink, then is the fool not dry. Bid the
    dishonest; if he cannot, let the botcher mend him. Anything
    what remedy? As there is no true cuckold but calamity, so
    beauty's a flower. The lady bade take away the fool; therefore, I
  OLIVIA. Sir, I bade them take away you.
  CLOWN. Misprision in the highest degree! Lady, 'Cucullus non facit
  OLIVIA. Well, sir, for want of other idleness, I'll bide your
  OLIVIA. Good fool, for my brother's death.
  CLOWN. The more fool, madonna, to mourn for your brother's soul
    being in heaven. Take away the fool, gentlemen.
  MALVOLIO. Yes, and shall do, till the pangs of death shake him.
    Infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make the better fool.
  CLOWN. God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the better
    rascal; I saw him put down the other day with an ordinary fool
    he is gagg'd. I protest I take these wise men that crow so at
    these set kind of fools no better than the fools' zanies.
  CLOWN. Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou speak'st well
  MARIA. Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much desires
  OLIVIA. From the Count Orsino, is it?
    the Count, I am sick, or not at home- what you will to dismiss
  OLIVIA. By mine honour, half drunk! What is he at the gate, cousin?
  SIR TOBY. 'Tis a gentleman here. [Hiccups] A plague o' these
  SIR TOBY. Lechery! I defy lechery. There's one at the gate.
  SIR TOBY. Let him be the devil an he will, I care not; give me
    heat makes him a fool; the second mads him; and a third drowns
  OLIVIA. Go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit o' my coz;
    for he's in the third degree of drink, he's drown'd; go look
  CLOWN. He is but mad yet, madonna, and the fool shall look to the
     and therefore comes to speak with you. I told him you were
    therefore comes to speak with you. What is to be said to him,
    like a sheriff's post, and be the supporter to a bench, but he'll
    would think his mother's milk were scarce out of him.
  VIOLA. The honourable lady of the house, which is she?
    tell me if this be the lady of the house, for I never saw her. I
    the least sinister usage.
    assurance if you be the lady of the house, that I may proceed in
  VIOLA. No, my profound heart; and yet, by the very fangs of malice
    I swear, I am not that I play. Are you the lady of the house?
    my commission. I will on with my speech in your praise, and then
    show you the heart of my message.
  OLIVIA. Come to what is important in't. I forgive you the praise.
  OLIVIA. It is the more like to be feigned; I pray you keep it in. I
    rather to wonder at you than to hear you. If you be not mad, be
  OLIVIA. Sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, when the
    taxation of homage: I hold the olive in my hand; my words are as
    maidenhead- to your cars, divinity; to any other's, profanation.
  OLIVIA. Give us the place alone; we will hear this divinity.
  VIOLA. To answer by the method: in the first of his heart.
    face? You are now out of your text; but we will draw the curtain
    and show you the picture. [Unveiling] Look you, sir, such a one I
  OLIVIA. 'Tis in grain, sir; 'twill endure wind and weather.
    Lady, you are the cruell'st she alive,
    If you will lead these graces to the grave,
    And leave the world no copy.
    indifferent red; item, two grey eyes with lids to them; item, one
    neck, one chin, and so forth. Were you sent hither to praise me?
    But, if you were the devil, you are fair.
    And in dimension and the shape of nature
    And call upon my soul within the house;
    And sing them loud even in the dead of night;
    Halloo your name to the reverberate hals,
    And make the babbling gossip of the air
    Between the elements of air and earth
    Do give thee five-fold blazon. Not too fast! Soft, soft!
    Unless the master were the man. How now!
    Even so quickly may one catch the plague?
    If that the youth will come this way to-morrow,
    I'll give him reasons for't. Hie thee, Malvolio.
  SEBASTIAN. By your patience, no. My stars shine darkly over me; the
    malignancy of my fate might perhaps distemper yours; therefore I
    were a bad recompense for your love to lay any of them on you.
  ANTONIO. Let me know of you whither you are bound.
    keep in; therefore it charges me in manners the rather to express
    myself. You must know of me then, Antonio, my name is Sebastian,
    which I call'd Roderigo; my father was that Sebastian of
    myself and a sister, both born in an hour; if the heavens had
    for some hour before you took me from the breach of the sea was
  ANTONIO. Alas the day!
    my bosom is full of kindness, and I am yet so near the manners of
    my mother that, upon the least occasion more, mine eyes will tell
    tales of me. I am bound to the Count Orsino's court. Farewell.
  ANTONIO. The gentleness of all the gods go with thee!
    Else would I very shortly see thee there.
    But come what may, I do adore thee so
  MALVOLIO. Were you not ev'n now with the Countess Olivia?
    hither.
  VIOLA. She took the ring of me; I'll none of it.
    it should be so return'd. If it be worth stooping for, there it
    She loves me, sure: the cunning of her passion
    I am the man. If it be so- as 'tis-
    Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.
    How easy is it for the proper-false
    In women's waxen hearts to set their forms!
    Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we!
    As I am woman- now alas the day!-
    What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe!
    up after midnight and to go to bed then is early; so that to go
    consist of the four elements?
  AGUECHEEK. Faith, so they say; but I think it rather consists of
  SIR TOBY. Th'art a scholar; let us therefore eat and drink.
  AGUECHEEK. Here comes the fool, i' faith.
  CLOWN. How now, my hearts! Did you never see the picture of 'we
  AGUECHEEK. By my troth, the fool has an excellent breast. I had
    rather than forty shillings I had such a leg, and so sweet a
    breath to sing, as the fool has. In sooth, thou wast in very
    of the Vapians passing the equinoctial of Queubus; 'twas very
    good, i' faith. I sent thee sixpence for thy leman; hadst it?
    whipstock. My lady has a white hand, and the Myrmidons are no
  AGUECHEEK. Excellent! Why, this is the best fooling, when all is
  SIR TOBY. Come on, there is sixpence for you. Let's have a song.
           Trip no further, pretty sweeting;
           In delay there lies no plenty,
  SIR TOBY. To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. But shall
    we make the welkin dance indeed? Shall we rouse the night-owl in
    in't to call thee knave, knight.
  AGUECHEEK. 'Tis not the first time I have constrained one to call
  CLOWN. Beshrew me, the knight's in admirable fooling.
  SIR TOBY. [Sings] O' the twelfth day of December-
  MARIA. For the love o' God, peace!
    remorse of voice? Is there no respect of place, persons, nor
    misdemeanours, you are welcome to the house; if not, and it would
  CLOWN. [Sings] Sir Toby, there you lie.
    steward? Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall
    to challenge him the field, and then to break promise with him
  SIR TOBY. Do't, knight. I'll write thee a challenge; or I'll
  MARIA. Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for to-night; since the youth of
    the Count's was to-day with my lady, she is much out of quiet.
     utters it by great swarths; the best persuaded of himself, so
    wherein, by the colour of his beard, the shape of his leg, the
    manner of his gait, the expressure of his eye, forehead, and
  SIR TOBY. He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop, that
    they come from my niece, and that she's in love with him.
    him. I will plant you two, and let the fool make a third, where
    he shall find the letter; observe his construction of it. For
    this night, to bed, and dream on the event. Farewell.
  SIR TOBY. Good night, Penthesilea.
    Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times.
  CURIO. Feste, the jester, my lord; a fool that the Lady Olivia's
    father took much delight in. He is about the house.
  DUKE. Seek him out, and play the tune the while.
    Come hither, boy. If ever thou shalt love,
    In the sweet pangs of it remember me;
    Save in the constant image of the creature
  VIOLA. It gives a very echo to the seat
  DUKE. She is not worth thee, then. What years, i' faith?
  DUKE. Too old, by heaven! Let still the woman take
    Or thy affection cannot hold the bent;
  VIOLA. And so they are; alas, that they are so!
    To die, even when they to perfection grow!
  DUKE. O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.
    The spinsters and the knitters in the sun,
    And the free maids that weave their thread with bones,
    And dallies with the innocence of love,
    Like the old age.
  DUKE. Ay; prithee, sing.                               [Music]
          On my black coffin let there be strown;
                 To weep there!
  DUKE. I'll pay thy pleasure, then.
  CLOWN. Truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid one time or another.
  DUKE. Give me now leave to leave thee.
  CLOWN. Now the melancholy god protect thee; and the tailor make thy
    would have men of such constancy put to sea, that their business
    might be everything, and their intent everywhere: for that's it
  DUKE. Let all the rest give place.
    Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty.
    Tell her my love, more noble than the world,
    Say that some lady, as perhaps there is,
    You tell her so. Must she not then be answer'd?
    Can bide the beating of so strong a passion
    So big to hold so much; they lack retention.
    Alas, their love may be call'd appetite-
    No motion of the liver, but the palate-
    But mine is all as hungry as the sea,
    In faith, they are as true of heart as we.
    My father had a daughter lov'd a man,
  VIOLA. I am all the daughters of my father's house,
    And all the brothers too- and yet I know not.
  DUKE. Ay, that's the theme.
  SIR TOBY. Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally
  SIR TOBY. To anger him we'll have the bear again; and we will fool
  SIR TOBY. Here comes the little villain.
  MARIA. Get ye all three into the box-tree. Malvolio's coming down
    this walk. He has been yonder i' the sun practising behaviour to
    his own shadow this half hour. Observe him, for the love of
    of him. Close, in the name of jesting! [As the men hide she drops
    a letter] Lie thou there; for here comes the trout that must be
  AGUECHEEK. 'Slight, I could so beat the rogue-
  MALVOLIO. There is example for't: the Lady of the Strachy married
    the yeoman of the wardrobe.
  SIR TOBY. O, for a stone-bow to hit him in the eye!
  MALVOLIO. And then to have the humour of state; and after a demure
    travel of regard, telling them I know my place as I would they
    should do theirs, to ask for my kinsman Toby-
    him. I frown the while, and perchance wind up my watch, or play
    with my- some rich jewel. Toby approaches; curtsies there to me-
  SIR TOBY. And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips then?
  FABIAN. Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.
  MALVOLIO. 'Besides, you waste the treasure of your time with a
                                          [Taking up the letter]
  FABIAN. Now is the woodcock near the gin.
  SIR TOBY. O, peace! And the spirit of humours intimate reading
  MALVOLIO. By my life, this is my lady's hand: these be her very
  MALVOLIO. [Reads] 'To the unknown belov'd, this, and my good
    wishes.' Her very phrases! By your leave, wax. Soft! And the
    'No man must know.' If this should be thee, Malvolio?
  SIR TOBY. Marry, hang thee, brock!
  SIR TOBY. And with what wing the staniel checks at it!
    capacity; there is no obstruction in this. And the end- what
  MALVOLIO. M- But then there is no consonancy in the sequel; that
  MALVOLIO. And then I comes behind.
  MALVOLIO. M. O. A. I. This simulation is not as the former; and
    these letters are in my name. Soft! here follows prose.
    thee; but be not afraid of greatness. Some are born great, some
    Fates open their hands; let thy blood and spirit embrace them;
    thyself into the trick of singularity. She thus advises thee that
    sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy yellow stockings, and
    wish'd to see thee ever cross-garter'd. I say, remember, Go to,
    thou art made, if thou desir'st to be so; if not, let me see thee
    a steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthy to touch
    thee,
    will wash off gross acquaintance, I will be point-devise the very
    with a kind of injunction drives me to these habits of her
    yellow stockings, and cross-garter'd, even with the swiftness of
    become thee well. Therefore in my presence still smile, dear my
    sweet, I prithee.'
    Jove, I thank thee. I will smile; I will do everything that thou
    thousands to be paid from the Sophy.
  SIR TOBY. And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.
  AGUECHEEK. Nor I neither.
  AGUECHEEK. Or o' mine either?
  AGUECHEEK. I' faith, or I either?
  SIR TOBY. Why, thou hast put him in such a dream that when the
  AIARIA. If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark his
  SIR TOBY. To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!
  VIOLA. Save thee, friend, and thy music!
  CLOWN. No, sir, I live by the church.
  CLOWN. No such matter, sir: I do live by the church; for I do live
    at my house, and my house doth stand by the church.
  VIOLA. So thou mayst say the king lies by a beggar, if a beggar
    dwell near him; or the church stands by thy tabor, if thy tabor
    stand by the church.
    chev'ril glove to a good wit. How quickly the wrong side may be
  VIOLA. Nay, that's certain; they that dally nicely with words may
    quickly make them wanton.
  CLOWN. I would, therefore, my sister had had name, sir.
    since bonds disgrac'd them.
    are grown so false I am loath to prove reason with them.
  VIOLA. Art not thou the Lady Olivia's fool?
  CLOWN. No, indeed, sir; the Lady Olivia has no folly; she will keep
    as pilchers are to herrings- the husband's the bigger. I am
  VIOLA. I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's.
  CLOWN. Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun- it
    shines everywhere. I would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be
    wisdom there.
  VIOLA. Nay, an thou pass upon me, I'll no more with thee.
    Hold, there's expenses for thee.             [Giving a coin]
  CLOWN. Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send the a beard!
  VIOLA. By my troth, I'll tell thee, I am almost sick for one;
  CLOWN. Would not a pair of these have bred, sir?
  VIOLA. Yes, being kept together and put to use.
                                           [Giving another coin]
    them whence you come; who you are and what you would are out of
    my welkin- I might say 'element' but the word is overworn.
  VIOLA. This fellow is wise enough to play the fool;
    He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
    The quality of persons, and the time;
    And, like the haggard, check at every feather
    But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.
  SIR TOBY. Will you encounter the house? My niece is desirous you
  VIOLA. I am bound to your niece, sir; I mean, she is the list of my
  SIR TOBY. Taste your legs, sir; put them to motion.
    Most excellent accomplish'd lady, the heavens rain odours on you!
  OLIVIA. Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.
    Y'are servant to the Count Orsino, youth.
    Would they were blanks rather than fill'd with me!
    But, would you undertake another suit,
    I had rather hear you to solicit that
    Than music from the spheres.
    After the last enchantment you did here,
    Have you not set mine honour at the stake,
  OLIVIA. Why, then, methinks 'tis time to smile again.
    O world, how apt the poor are to be proud!
    If one should be a prey, how much the better
    To fall before the lion than the wolf!       [Clock strikes]
    The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.
    I prithee tell me what thou think'st of me.
  OLIVIA. If I think so, I think the same of you.
    In the contempt and anger of his lip!
    Cesario, by the roses of the spring,
    I love thee so that, maugre all thy pride,
    For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause;
    But rather reason thus with reason fetter:
  AGUECHEEK. Marry, I saw your niece do more favours to the Count's
  SIR TOBY. Did she see thee the while, old boy? Tell me that.
  FABIAN. I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of judgment
  SIR TOBY. And they have been grand-jurymen since before Noah was a
  FABIAN. She did show favour to the youth in your sight only to
    your heart and brimstone in your liver. You should then have
    accosted her; and with some excellent jests, fire-new from the
    mint, you should have bang'd the youth into dumbness. This was
    into the north of my lady's opinion; where you will hang like an
    laudable attempt either of valour or policy.
  SIR TOBY. Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of
    valour. Challenge me the Count's youth to fight with him; hurt
    thyself there is no love-broker in the world can more prevail in
  AGUECHEEK. Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?
    Taunt him with the license of ink; if thou thou'st him some
    thy sheet of paper, although the sheet were big enough for the
    bed of Ware in England, set 'em down; go about it. Let there be
  SIR TOBY. We'll call thee at the cubiculo. Go.
  SIR TOBY. Never trust me then; and by all means stir on the youth
    to an answer. I think oxen and wainropes cannot hale them
    together. For Andrew, if he were open'd and you find so much
    blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea, I'll eat the
  FABIAN. And his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no great
  SIR TOBY. Look where the youngest wren of nine comes.
  MARIA. If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourselves into
    stitches, follow me. Yond gull Malvolio is turned heathen, a very
    renegado; for there is no Christian that means to be saved by
    point of the letter that I dropp'd to betray him. He does smile
    his face into more lines than is in the new map with the
    augmentation of the Indies. You have not seen such a thing as
    I will no further chide you.
    Being skilless in these parts; which to a stranger,
    The rather by these arguments of fear,
    I can no other answer make but thanks,
    Shall we go see the reliques of this town?
    With the memorials and the things of fame
    I do not without danger walk these streets:
    Once in a sea-fight 'gainst the Count his galleys
    Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel
    What we took from them; which, for traffic's sake,
  SEBASTIAN. Do not then walk too open.
    In the south suburbs, at the Elephant,
    Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge
    With viewing of the town; there shall you have me.
  OLIVIA. Why, what's the matter? Does he rave?
    best to have some guard about you if he come; for sure the man is
  OLIVIA. Go call him hither.                         Exit MARIA
    I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.
    obstruction in the blood, this cross-gartering; but what of that?
    If it please the eye of one, it is with me as the very true
  OLIVIA. Why, how dost thou, man? What is the matter with thee?
    I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.
  MALVOLIO. To bed? Ay, sweetheart, and I'll come to thee.
  OLIVIA. God comfort thee! Why dost thou smile so, and kiss thy hand
  MALVOLIO. 'And some have greatness thrust upon them.'
  OLIVIA. Heaven restore thee!
  MALVOLIO. 'And wish'd to see thee cross-garterd.'
  MALVOLIO. 'If not, let me see thee a servant still.'
  SERVANT. Madam, the young gentleman of the Count Orsino's is
    for the half of my dowry.
    Toby to look to me! This concurs directly with the letter: she
    incites me to that in the letter. 'Cast thy humble slough,' says
    tongue tang with arguments of state; put thyself into the trick
    of singularity' and consequently sets down the manner how, as: a
    sad face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue, in the habit of
    after my degree, but 'fellow.' Why, everything adheres together,
    that can be can come between me and the full prospect of my
    hopes. Well, Jove, not I, is the doer of this, and he is to be
  SIR TOBY. Which way is he, in the name of sanctity? If all the
  MARIA. Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him! Did not I tell
    defy the devil; consider, he's an enemy to mankind.
  MARIA. La you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at
  SIR TOBY. Prithee hold thy peace; this is not the way. Do you not
  SIR TOBY. His very genius hath taken the infection of the device,
  MARIA. Nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.
  MARIA. The house will be the quieter.
    is already in the belief that he's mad. We may carry it thus, for
    bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of
  AGUECHEEK. Here's the challenge; read it. I warrant there's vinegar
    call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for't.'
  FABIAN. A good note; that keeps you from the blow of the law.
  SIR TOBY. [Reads] 'Thou com'st to the Lady Olivia, and in my sight
    she uses thee kindly; but thou liest in thy throat; that is not
    the matter I challenge thee for.'
  SIR TOBY. [Reads] 'I will waylay thee going home; where if it be
  FABIAN. Still you keep o' th' windy side of the law. Good!
  SIR TOBY. [Reads] 'Fare thee well; and God have mercy upon one of
  SIR TOBY. Go, Sir Andrew; scout me for him at the corner of the
  SIR TOBY. Now will not I deliver his letter; for the behaviour of
    the young gentleman gives him out to be of good capacity and
    will breed no terror in the youth: he will find it comes from a
    mouth, set upon Aguecheek notable report of valour, and drive the
    will so fright them both that they will kill one another by the
  FABIAN. Here he comes with your niece; give them way till he take
  SIR TOBY. I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a
  VIOLA. With the same haviour that your passion bears
  OLIVIA. Well, come again to-morrow. Fare thee well;
    A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.           Exit
  SIR TOBY. Gentleman, God save thee.
  SIR TOBY. That defence thou hast, betake thee tot. Of what nature
    the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know not; but thy
    intercepter, full of despite, bloody as the hunter, attends
    thee at the orchard end. Dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy
  SIR TOBY. You'll find it otherwise, I assure you; therefore, if you
  VIOLA. I will return again into the house and desire some conduct
    of the lady. I am no fighter. I have heard of some kind of men
    that put quarrels purposely on others to taste their valour;
    competent injury; therefore, get you on and give him his desire.
    Back you shall not to the house, unless you undertake that with
    me which with as much safety you might answer him; therefore on,
    courteous office as to know of the knight what my offence to him
  FABIAN. I know the knight is incens'd against you, even to a mortal
    arbitrement; but nothing of the circumstance more.
    as you are like to find him in the proof of his valour. He is
    indeed, sir, the most skilful, bloody, and fatal opposite that
    rather go with sir priest than sir knight. I care not who knows
    gives me the stuck in with such a mortal motion that it is
    inevitable; and on the answer, he pays you as surely as your feet
    hit the ground they step on. They say he has been fencer to the
    challeng'd him. Let him let the matter slip, and I'll give him
  SIR TOBY. I'll make the motion. Stand here, make a good show on't;
    this shall end without the perdition of souls. [Aside] Marry,
    [To FABIAN] I have his horse to take up the quarrel; I have
    persuaded him the youth's a devil.
    Therefore draw for the supportance of his vow; he protests he
    tell them how much I lack of a man.
  SIR TOBY. Come, Sir Andrew, there's no remedy; the gentleman will,
    for his honour's sake, have one bout with you; he cannot by the
    Have done offence, I take the fault on me:
  FABIAN. O good Sir Toby, hold! Here come the officers.
  FIRST OFFICER. This is the man; do thy office.
  SECOND OFFICER. Antonio, I arrest thee at the suit
    But there's no remedy; I shall answer it.
    For the fair kindness you have show'd me here,
    Hold, there's half my coffer.
  ANTONIO. O heavens themselves!
    I snatch'd one half out of the jaws of death,
    In nature there's no blemish but the mind:
    None can be call'd deform'd but the unkind.
    Virtue is beauty; but the beauteous evil
    Are empty trunks, o'erflourish'd by the devil.
    That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!
  SIR TOBY. Come hither, knight; come hither, Fabian; we'll whisper
  VIOLA. He nam'd Sebastian. I my brother know
    In favour was my brother; and he went
  FABIAN. Come, let's see the event.
    of thee.
    name is not Master Cesario; nor this is not my nose neither.
  SEBASTIAN. I prithee vent thy folly somewhere else.
    lubber, the world, will prove a cockney. I prithee now, ungird
  SEBASTIAN. I prithee, foolish Greek, depart from me;
    There's money for thee; if you tarry longer
    give fools money get themselves a good report after fourteen
  SEBASTIAN. Why, there's for thee, and there, and there.
    Are all the people mad?
  SIR TOBY. Hold, sir, or I'll throw your dagger o'er the house.
  AGUECHEEK. Nay, let him alone. I'll go another way to work with
    him; I'll have an action of battery against him, if there be any
  SEBASTIAN. I will be free from thee. What wouldst thou now?
    If thou dar'st tempt me further, draw thy sword.     [Draws]
  SIR TOBY. What, what? Nay, then I must have an ounce or two of this
  OLIVIA. Hold, Toby; on thy life, I charge thee hold.
    Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves,
    I prithee, gentle friend,
    And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks
    This ruffian hath botch'd up, that thou thereby
    He started one poor heart of mine in thee.
  SEBASTIAN. What relish is in this? How runs the stream?
    Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep;
  OLIVIA. Nay, come, I prithee. Would thou'dst be rul'd by me!
  MARIA. Nay, I prithee, put on this gown and this beard; make him
    believe thou art Sir Topas the curate; do it quickly. I'll call
    Sir Toby the whilst.                                    Exit
    I would I were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown. I
    am not tall enough to become the function well nor lean enough to
  SIR TOBY. Jove bless thee, Master Parson.
  CLOWN. Bonos dies, Sir Toby; for as the old hermit of Prague, that
  MALVOLIO. [Within] Who calls there?
  CLOWN. Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio the
    not think I am mad; they have laid me here in hideous darkness.
  CLOWN. Fie, thou dishonest Satan! I call thee by the most modest
    terms, for I am one of those gentle ones that will use the devil
  CLOWN. Why, it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes, and the
    clerestories toward the south north are as lustrous as ebony; and
  CLOWN. Madman, thou errest. I say there is no darkness but
    ignorance; in which thou art more puzzled than the Egyptians in
    their fog.
    ignorance were as dark as hell; and I say there was never man
    thus abus'd. I am no more mad than you are; make the trial of it
  CLOWN. What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wild fowl?
  MALVOLIO. That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.
  MALVOLIO. I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his
  CLOWN. Fare thee well. Remain thou still in darkness: thou shalt
    fear to kill a woodcock, lest thou dispossess the soul of thy
    grandam. Fare thee well.
    sees thee not.
    this sport to the upshot. Come by and by to my chamber.
  CLOWN. [Sings] She loves another- Who calls, ha?
    gentleman, I will live to be thankful to thee for't.
  MALVOLIO. Fool, there was never man so notoriously abus'd;
    ministers to me, asses, and do all they can to face me out of my
  CLOWN. Advise you what. you say: the minister is here.
    [Speaking as SIR TOPAS] Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore!
    I tell thee I am as well in my wits as any man in Illyria.
    advantage thee more than ever the bearing of letter did.
  MALVOLIO. Believe me, I am not; I tell thee true.
  MALVOLIO. Fool, I'll requite it in the highest degree; I prithe be
                   Like to the old Vice,
                   Cries, Ah, ha! to the devil,
  SEBASTIAN. This is the air; that is the glorious sun;
    Yet 'tis not madness. Where's Antonio, then?
    I could not find him at the Elephant;
    Yet there he was; and there I found this credit,
    That he did range the town to seek me out.
    To any other trust but that I am mad,
    Or else the lady's mad; yet if 'twere so,
    Take and give back affairs and their dispatch
    That is deceivable. But here the lady comes.
    Into the chantry by; there, before him
    Plight me the fun assurance of your faith,
  OLIVIA. Then lead the way, good father; and heavens so shine
    That they may fairly note this act of mine!           Exeunt
  CLOWN. Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.
  DUKE. Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?
  DUKE. I know thee well. How dost thou, my good fellow?
  CLOWN. Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse for my
  DUKE. Just the contrary: the better for thy friends.
  CLOWN. No, sir, the worse.
  CLOWN. Marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me. Now my
    profit in the knowledge of myself, and by my friends I am abused;
    your two affirmatives, why then, the worse for my friends, and
    the better for my foes.
  DUKE. Thou shalt not be the worse for me. There's gold.
    make it another.
    There's another.
  CLOWN. Primo, secundo, tertio, is a good play; and the old saying
    measure; or the bells of Saint Bennet, sir, may put you in mind-
    her along with you, it may awake my bounty further.
    is the sin of covetousness. But, as you say, sir, let your bounty
  VIOLA. Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.
    As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war.
    With the most noble bottom of our fleet
    That very envy and the tongue of los
    Cried fame and honour on him. What's the matter?
    That took the Phoenix and her fraught from Candy;
    And this is he that did the Tiger board
    Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,
    What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies
    Be pleas'd that I shake off these names you give me:
    Orsino's enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither:
    That most ingrateful boy there by your side
    From the rude sea's enrag'd and foamy mouth
    His life I gave him, and did thereto ad
    Into the danger of this adverse town;
  DUKE. Here comes the Countess; now heaven walks on earth.
    But for thee, fellow- fellow, thy words are madness.
  OLIVIA. If it be aught to the old tune, my lord,
    My soul the faithfull'st off'rings hath breath'd out
  DUKE. Why should I not, had I the heart to do it,
    Like to the Egyptian thief at point of death,
    And that I partly know the instrument
    Live you the marble-breasted tyrant still;
    I'll sacrifice the lamb that I do love
    More than I love these eyes, more than my life,
    Call forth the holy father.                Exit an ATTENDANT
  OLIVIA. Whither, my lord? Cesario, husband, stay.
  OLIVIA. Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear
    That makes thee strangle thy propriety.
    Be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art
    O, welcome, father!
    Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence,
    Attested by the holy close of lips,
    And all the ceremony of this compact
  AGUECHEEK. For the love of God, a surgeon!
  OLIVIA. What's the matter?
    bloody coxcomb too. For the love of God, your help! I had rather
    coward, but he's the very devil incardinate.
    have tickl'd you othergates than he did.
  SIR TOBY. That's all one; has hurt me, and there's th' end on't.
  OLIVIA. Away with him. Who hath made this havoc with them?
    together.
    But, had it been the brother of my blood,
    Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows
    We made each other but so late ago.
    How have the hours rack'd and tortur'd me
    Since I have lost thee!
    Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?
  SEBASTIAN. Do I stand there? I never had a brother;
    Nor can there be that deity in my nature
    Whom the blind waves and surges have devour'd.
  VIOLA. Of Messaline; Sebastian was my father.
    Such a Sebastian was my brother too;
    Which from the womb I did participate.
    Were you a woman, as the rest goes even,
  VIOLA. My father had a mole upon his brow.
    All the occurrence of my fortune since
    Nor are you therein, by my life, deceiv'd;
    If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,
    As doth that orbed continent the fire
    And let me see thee in thy woman's weeds.
  OLIVIA. He shall enlarge him. Fetch Malvolio hither;
  CLOWN. Truly, madam, he holds Belzebub at the stave's end as well
    epistles are no gospels, so it skills not much when they are
  CLOWN. Look then to be well edified when the fool delivers the
    madman. [Reads madly ] 'By the Lord, madam-'
  OLIVIA. Prithee read i' thy right wits.
    thus; therefore perpend, my Princess, and give ear.
  FABIAN. [Reads] 'By the Lord, madam, you wrong me, and the world
    your drunken cousin rule over me, yet have I the benefit of my
    induced me to the semblance I put on, with the which I doubt not
  OLIVIA. See him deliver'd, Fabian; bring him hither.
    My lord, so please you, these things further thought on,
    So much against the mettle of your sex,
  DUKE. Is this the madman?
    You can say none of this. Well, grant it then,
    And tell me, in the modesty of honour,
    Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people;
    Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,
    And made the most notorious geck and gul
    Though, I confess, much like the character;
    First told me thou wast mad; then cam'st in smiling,
    Upon thee in the letter. Prithee, be content;
    This practice hath most shrewdly pass'd upon thee,
    But, when we know the grounds and authors of it,
    Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge
    Taint the condition of this present hour,
    May rather pluck on laughter than revenge,
    If that the injuries be justly weigh'd
  OLIVIA. Alas, poor fool, how have they baffl'd thee!
    have greatness thrown upon them.' I was one, sir, in this
    interlude- one Sir Topas, sir; but that's all one. 'By the Lord,
    the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.
  MALVOLIO. I'll be reveng'd on the whole pack of you.
    He hath not told us of the captain yet.
    But when in other habits you are seen,
                                        Exeunt all but the CLOWN
             With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
             For the rain it raineth every day.
             With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
           'Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate,
             For the rain it raineth every day.
             With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
             For the rain it raineth every day.
             With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
             For the rain it raineth every day.
           A great while ago the world begun,
             With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
  DUKE OF MILAN, father to Silvia
  VALENTINE, one of the two gentlemen
  ANTONIO, father to Proteus
  LAUNCE, the like to Proteus
  SILVIA, the Duke's daughter, beloved of Valentine
Verona; Milan; the frontiers of Mantua
    To the sweet glances of thy honour'd love,
    I rather would entreat thy company
    To see the wonders of the world abroad,
    But since thou lov'st, love still, and thrive therein,
    If ever danger do environ thee,
  PROTEUS. Upon some book I love I'll pray for thee.
    How young Leander cross'd the Hellespont.
    And yet you never swum the Hellespont.
  PROTEUS. Over the boots! Nay, give me not the boots.
  VALENTINE. No, I will not, for it boots thee not.
    If lost, why then a grievous labour won;
  PROTEUS. Yet writers say, as in the sweetest bud
    Inhabits in the finest wits of all.
  VALENTINE. And writers say, as the most forward bud
    Is eaten by the canker ere it blow,
    Even so by love the young and tender wit
    Is turn'd to folly, blasting in the bud,
    Losing his verdure even in the prime,
    And all the fair effects of future hopes.
    But wherefore waste I time to counsel the
    Once more adieu. My father at the road
    Expects my coming, there to see me shipp'd.
  PROTEUS. And thither will I bring thee, Valentine.
    To Milan let me hear from thee by letters
    And I likewise will visit thee with mine.
  PROTEUS. All happiness bechance to thee in Milan!
    He leaves his friends to dignify them more:
    War with good counsel, set the world at nought;
  SPEED. Twenty to one then he is shipp'd already,
    And I have play'd the sheep in losing him.
    An if the shepherd be awhile away.
  SPEED. You conclude that my master is a shepherd then, and
  SPEED. Why then, my horns are his horns, whether I wake or sleep.
  PROTEUS. It shall go hard but I'll prove it by another.
  SPEED. The shepherd seeks the sheep, and not the sheep the
    therefore, I am no sheep.
  PROTEUS. The sheep for fodder follow the shepherd; the shepherd for
    food follows not the sheep: thou for wages followest thy master;
    thy master for wages follows not thee. Therefore, thou art a
  SPEED. Such another proof will make me cry 'baa.'
  SPEED. If the ground be overcharg'd, you were best stick her.
  PROTEUS. You mistake; I mean the pound- a pinfold.
  PROTEUS. And that set together is 'noddy.'
  SPEED. Now you have taken the pains to set it together, take it for
  PROTEUS. No, no; you shall have it for bearing the letter.
  SPEED. Marry, sir, the letter, very orderly; having nothing but the
  PROTEUS. Come, come, open the matter; in brief, what said she?
  SPEED. Open your purse, that the money and the matter may be both
    Which cannot perish, having thee aboard,
    Receiving them from such a worthless post.              Exit
    Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?
  JULIA. Of all the fair resort of gentlemen
  LUCETTA. Please you, repeat their names; I'll show my mind
  JULIA. What think'st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?
  JULIA. What think'st thou of the rich Mercatio?
  JULIA. What think'st thou of the gentle Proteus?
  JULIA. Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest?
  LUCETTA. I have no other but a woman's reason:
  JULIA. Why, he, of all the rest, hath never mov'd me.
  LUCETTA. Yet he, of all the rest, I think, best loves ye.
  JULIA. They do not love that do not show their love.
  LUCETTA. O, they love least that let men know their love.
  LUCETTA. That the contents will show.
  JULIA. Say, say, who gave it thee?
    He would have given it you; but I, being in the way,
    Did in your name receive it; pardon the fault, I pray.
    And you an officer fit for the place.
    There, take the paper; see it be return'd;
  JULIA. And yet, I would I had o'erlook'd the letter.
    And would not force the letter to my view!
    Which they would have the profferer construe 'Ay.'
    That like a testy babe will scratch the nurse,
    And presently, all humbled, kiss the rod!
  JULIA. Why didst thou stoop then?
    Best sing it to the tune of 'Light o' Love.'
  JULIA. Heavy! belike it hath some burden then.
  JULIA. Let's see your song.     [LUCETTA withholds the letter]
  LUCETTA. Keep tune there still, so you will sing it out.
    And mar the concord with too harsh a descant;
  LUCETTA. Indeed, I bid the base for Proteus.
    Here is a coil with protestation!         [Tears the letter]
    Go, get you gone; and let the papers lie.
    You would be fing'ring them, to anger me.
    To be so ang'red with another letter.                   Exit
  JULIA. Nay, would I were so ang'red with the same!
    And kill the bees that yield it with your stings!
    I throw thy name against the bruising stones,
    Shall lodge thee till thy wound be throughly heal'd;
    Till I have found each letter in the letter-
    And throw it thence into the raging sea.
    To the sweet Julia.' That I'll tear away;
    Thus will I fold them one upon another;
    Dinner is ready, and your father stays.
  LUCETTA. What, shall these papers lie like tell-tales here?
  JULIA. If you respect them, best to take them up.
  LUCETTA. Nay, I was taken up for laying them down;
    Yet here they shall not lie for catching cold.
  JULIA. I see you have a month's mind to them.
    Wherewith my brother held you in the cloister?
    While other men, of slender reputation,
    Put forth their sons to seek preferment out:
    Some to the wars, to try their fortune there;
    Some to the studious universities.
    For any, or for all these exercises,
    Not being tried and tutor'd in the world:
    And perfected by the swift course of time.
    Then tell me whither were I best to send him.
    Attends the Emperor in his royal court.
  PANTHINO. 'Twere good, I think, your lordship sent him thither:
    Even with the speediest expedition
    I will dispatch him to the Emperor's court.
    With other gentlemen of good esteem
    Are journeying to salute the Emperor,
    And to commend their service to his will.
  ANTONIO. Good company; with them shall Proteus go.
    Here is her hand, the agent of her heart;
    O that our fathers would applaud our loves,
    To seal our happiness with their consents!
  ANTONIO. How now! What letter are you reading there?
  ANTONIO. Lend me the letter; let me see what news.
    And daily graced by the Emperor;
    For what I will, I will, and there an end.
    With Valentinus in the Emperor's court;
  ANTONIO. Look what thou want'st shall be sent after thee.
  PROTEUS. Thus have I shunn'd the fire for fear of burning,
    And drench'd me in the sea, where I am drown'd.
    I fear'd to show my father Julia's letter,
    And with the vantage of mine own excuse
    Which now shows all the beauty of the sun,
  PANTHINO. Sir Proteus, your father calls for you;
    He is in haste; therefore, I pray you, go.
  PROTEUS. Why, this it is: my heart accords thereto;
  SPEED. Why, then, this may be yours; for this is but one.
  SPEED. Marry, by these special marks: first, you have learn'd, like
    had the pestilence; to sigh, like a school-boy that had lost his
    walk like one of the lions; when you fasted, it was presently
  VALENTINE. Are all these things perceiv'd in me?
    simple, none else would; but you are so without these follies
    that these follies are within you, and shine through you like the
  SPEED. That's because the one is painted, and the other out of all
    eyes had the lights they were wont to have when you chid at Sir
  VALENTINE. What should I see then?
  VALENTINE. Belike, boy, then you are in love; for last morning you
    swing'd me for my love, which makes me the bolder to chide you
  SPEED. Are they not lamely writ?
  VALENTINE. No, boy, but as well as I can do them.
    Unto the secret nameless friend of yours;
  SILVIA. A pretty period! Well, I guess the sequel;
  SPEED.  [Aside]  And yet you will; and yet another' yet.'
  SILVIA. Yes, yes; the lines are very quaintly writ;
    But, since unwillingly, take them again.
    Nay, take them.                      [Gives hack the letter]
  VALENTINE. Madam, they are for you.
  SILVIA. Ay, ay, you writ them, sir, at my request;
    But I will none of them; they are for you:
    I would have had them writ more movingly.
  VALENTINE. Please you, I'll write your ladyship another.
  VALENTINE. If it please me, madam, what then?
    As a nose on a man's face, or a weathercock on a steeple!
    O excellent device! Was there ever heard a better,
    That my master, being scribe, to himself should write the letter?
  SPEED. Nay, I was rhyming: 'tis you that have the reason.
    Why, do you not perceive the jest?
  VALENTINE. That's the letter I writ to her friend.
  SPEED. And that letter hath she deliver'd, and there an end.
  SPEED. Ay, but hearken, sir; though the chameleon Love can feed on
    the air, I am one that am nourish'd by my victuals, and would
  JULIA. If you turn not, you will return the sooner.
  PROTEUS. Why, then, we'll make exchange. Here, take you this.
  JULIA. And seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
    And when that hour o'erslips me in the day
    My father stays my coming; answer not;
  LAUNCE. Nay, 'twill be this hour ere I have done weeping; all the
    kind of the Launces have this very fault. I have receiv'd my
    proportion, like the Prodigious Son, and am going with Sir
    Proteus to the Imperial's court. I think Crab my dog be the
    sourest-natured dog that lives: my mother weeping, my father
    the manner of it. This shoe is my father; no, this left shoe is
    my father; no, no, left shoe is my mother; nay, that cannot be so
    neither; yes, it is so, it is so, it hath the worser sole. This
    shoe with the hole in it is my mother, and this my father. A
    this hat is Nan our maid; I am the dog; no, the dog is himself,
    and I am the dog- O, the dog is me, and I am myself; ay, so, so.
    Now come I to my father: 'Father, your blessing.' Now should not
    the shoe speak a word for weeping; now should I kiss my father;
    well, he weeps on. Now come I to my mother. O that she could
    speak now like a wood woman! Well, I kiss her- why there 'tis;
    here's my mother's breath up and down. Now come I to my sister;
    mark the moan she makes. Now the dog all this while sheds not a
    tear, nor speaks a word; but see how I lay the dust with my
    thou art to post after with oars. What's the matter? Why weep'st
    thou, man? Away, ass! You'll lose the tide if you tarry any
  LAUNCE. It is no matter if the tied were lost; for it is the
  PANTHINO. What's the unkindest tide?
  PANTHINO. Tut, man, I mean thou'lt lose the flood, and, in losing
    the flood, lose thy voyage, and, in losing thy voyage, lose thy
  LAUNCE. Lose the tide, and the voyage, and the master, and the
    service, and the tied! Why, man, if the river were dry, I am able
    to fill it with my tears; if the wind were down, I could drive
    the boat with my sighs.
  PANTHINO. Come, come away, man; I was sent to call thee.
  VALENTINE. Of my mistress, then.
  THURIO. What instance of the contrary?
  VALENTINE. Well, then, I'll double your folly.
  VALENTINE. 'Tis indeed, madam; we thank the giver.
  VALENTINE. Yourself, sweet lady; for you gave the fire. Sir Thurio
    and, I think, no other treasure to give your followers; for it
    appears by their bare liveries that they live by your bare words.
  SILVIA. No more, gentlemen, no more. Here comes my father.
    Sir Valentine, your father is in good health.
    To any happy messenger from thence.
  VALENTINE. Ay, my good lord, I know the gentleman
    The honour and regard of such a father.
    We have convers'd and spent our hours together;
    Omitting the sweet benefit of time
    To clothe mine age with angel-like perfection,
    Comes all the praises that I now bestow,
  DUKE. Welcome him, then, according to his worth-
    I will send him hither to you presently.           Exit DUKE
  VALENTINE. This is the gentleman I told your ladyship
  SILVIA. Belike that now she hath enfranchis'd them
    Upon some other pawn for fealty.
  VALENTINE. Nay, sure, I think she holds them prisoners still.
  SILVIA. Nay, then, he should be blind; and, being blind,
  SILVIA. Have done, have done; here comes the gentleman.
  SILVIA. His worth is warrant for his welcome hither,
  THURIO. Madam, my lord your father would speak with you.
  PROTEUS. Your friends are well, and have them much commended.
  PROTEUS. I left them all in health.
    And made them watchers of mine own heart's sorrow.
    Upon the very naked name of love.
    Was this the idol that you worship so?
    And I must minister the like to you.
  VALENTINE. Then speak the truth by her; if not divine,
    Sovereign to all the creatures on the earth.
  VALENTINE. And I will help thee to prefer her too:
    To bear my lady's train, lest the base earth
    Disdain to root the summer-swelling flow'r
    To her, whose worth makes other worthies nothing;
  VALENTINE. Not for the world! Why, man, she is mine own;
    As twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl,
    The water nectar, and the rocks pure gold.
    Forgive me that I do not dream on thee,
    My foolish rival, that her father likes
    With all the cunning manner of our flight,
    The ladder made of cords, and all the means
    In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel.
    I must unto the road to disembark
    And then I'll presently attend you.
    Even as one heat another heat expels
    Or as one nail by strength drives out another,
    So the remembrance of my former love
    Bears no impression of the thing it was.
    And that's the reason I love him so little.
    the hostess say 'Welcome!'
  SPEED. Come on, you madcap; I'll to the alehouse with you
  LAUNCE. Marry, after they clos'd in earnest, they parted very
  SPEED. How then? Shall he marry her?
  LAUNCE. No, neither.
  SPEED. What, are they broken?
  LAUNCE. No, they are both as whole as a fish.
  SPEED. Why then, how stands the matter with them?
  SPEED. What an ass art thou! I understand thee not.
  LAUNCE. Ay, and what I do too; look thee, I'll but lean, and my
  SPEED. It stands under thee, indeed.
  SPEED. The conclusion is, then, that it will.
  LAUNCE. I never knew him otherwise.
  LAUNCE. Why, fool, I meant not thee, I meant thy master.
  SPEED. I tell thee my master is become a hot lover.
  LAUNCE. Why, I tell thee I care not though he burn himself in love.
    If thou wilt, go with me to the alehouse; if not, thou art an
    Hebrew, a Jew, and not worth the name of a Christian.
  LAUNCE. Because thou hast not so much charity in thee as to go to
    the ale with a Christian. Wilt thou go?
    To learn his wit t' exchange the bad for better.
    But there I leave to love where I should love.
    If I keep them, I needs must lose myself;
    If I lose them, thus find I by their loss:
    Now presently I'll give her father notice
    Of their disguising and pretended flight,
    And, ev'n in kind love, I do conjure thee,
    Who art the table wherein all my thoughts
  LUCETTA. Alas, the way is wearisome and long!
    And when the flight is made to one so dear,
    Pity the dearth that I have pined in
    Didst thou but know the inly touch of love.
    As seek to quench the fire of love with words.
    But qualify the fire's extreme rage,
    Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.
  JULIA. The more thou dam'st it up, the more it burns.
    With willing sport, to the wild ocean.
    Till the last step have brought me to my love;
    And there I'll rest as, after much turmoil,
  LUCETTA. Why then, your ladyship must cut your hair.
  LUCETTA. You must needs have them with a codpiece, madam.
    But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me
  LUCETTA. If you think so, then stay at home and go not.
  JULIA. That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear:
  LUCETTA. All these are servants to deceitful men.
  JULIA. Base men that use them to so base effect!
    Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence.
    Myself am one made privy to the plot.
    Thus, for my duty's sake, I rather chose
  DUKE. Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care,
    This love of theirs myself have often seen,
    Haply when they have judg'd me fast asleep,
    And so, unworthily, disgrace the man,
    I gave him gentle looks, thereby to find
    And thence she cannot be convey'd away.
  PROTEUS. Know, noble lord, they have devis'd a mean
    For which the youthful lover now is gone,
    That I had any light from thee of this.
  DUKE. Sir Valentine, whither away so fast?
  VALENTINE. Please it your Grace, there is a messenger
    And I am going to deliver them.
  DUKE. Be they of much import?
  VALENTINE. The tenour of them doth but signify
  DUKE. Nay then, no matter; stay with me awhile;
    I am to break with thee of some affairs
    'Tis not unknown to thee that I have sought
  VALENTINE. I know it well, my lord; and, sure, the match
    Were rich and honourable; besides, the gentleman
    Neither regarding that she is my child
    Nor fearing me as if I were her father;
    And, may I say to thee, this pride of hers,
    And, where I thought the remnant of mine age
    Now, therefore, would I have thee to my tutor-
    Besides, the fashion of the time is chang'd-
    Dumb jewels often in their silent kind
    Send her another; never give her o'er,
    For scorn at first makes after-love the more.
    But rather to beget more love in you;
    For why, the fools are mad if left alone.
    Flatter and praise, commend, extol their graces;
    Though ne'er so black, say they have angels' faces.
  VALENTINE. Why then I would resort to her by night.
  DUKE. Ay, but the doors be lock'd and keys kept safe,
  DUKE. Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground,
  VALENTINE. Why then a ladder, quaintly made of cords,
    Would serve to scale another Hero's tow'r,
  DUKE. But, hark thee; I will go to her alone;
    How shall I best convey the ladder thither?
  DUKE. A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn?
    I'll get me one of such another length.
  VALENTINE. Why, any cloak will serve the turn, my lord.
    I pray thee, let me feel thy cloak upon me.
    I'll be so bold to break the seal for once.          [Reads]
        And slaves they are to me, that send them flying.
      O, could their master come and go as lightly,
        Himself would lodge where, senseless, they are lying!
      My herald thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them,
        While I, their king, that thither them importune,
      Do curse the grace that with such grace hath blest them,
      I curse myself, for they are sent by me,
        That they should harbour where their lord should be.'
      'Silvia, this night I will enfranchise thee.'
    'Tis so; and here's the ladder for the purpose.
    Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly car,
    And with thy daring folly burn the world?
    Wilt thou reach stars because they shine on thee?
    Thank me for this more than for all the favours
    Which, all too much, I have bestow'd on thee.
    Will give thee time to leave our royal court,
    By heaven! my wrath shall far exceed the love
  VALENTINE. And why not death rather than living torment?
    And feed upon the shadow of perfection.
    Except I be by Silvia in the night,
    There is no music in the nightingale;
    Unless I look on Silvia in the day,
  LAUNCE. Him we go to find: there's not a hair on 's head but 'tis a
  PROTEUS. Who then? his spirit?
  VALENTINE. Neither.
  PROTEUS. What then?
    So much of bad already hath possess'd them.
    For they are harsh, untuneable, and bad.
  LAUNCE. Sir, there is a proclamation that you are vanished.
  PROTEUS. That thou art banished- O, that's the news!-
  PROTEUS. Ay, ay; and she hath offered to the doom-
    Those at her father's churlish feet she tender'd;
    With them, upon her knees, her humble self,
    Wringing her hands, whose whiteness so became them
    As if but now they waxed pale for woe.
    But neither bended knees, pure hands held up,
    With many bitter threats of biding there.
  VALENTINE. No more; unless the next word that thou speak'st
    If so, I pray thee breathe it in mine ear,
    As ending anthem of my endless dolour.
    Time is the nurse and breeder of all good.
    Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love.
    Come, I'll convey thee through the city gate;
    And, ere I part with thee, confer at large
  VALENTINE. I pray thee, Launce, an if thou seest my boy,
    Bid him make haste and meet me at the Northgate.
  LAUNCE. I am but a fool, look you, and yet I have the wit to think
    water-spaniel- which is much in a bare Christian. Here is the
    cannot fetch, but only carry; therefore is she better than a
  SPEED. Well, your old vice still: mistake the word. What news,
    then, in your paper?
  SPEED. Let me read them.
  LAUNCE. Fie on thee, jolt-head; thou canst not read.
  LAUNCE. I will try thee. Tell me this: Who begot thee?
  SPEED. Marry, the son of my grandfather.
  LAUNCE. O illiterate loiterer. It was the son of thy grandmother.
  LAUNCE.  [Handing over the paper]  There; and Saint Nicholas be thy
  LAUNCE. And thereof comes the proverb: Blessing of your heart, you
  LAUNCE. A special virtue; for then she need not be wash'd and
  LAUNCE. Then may I set the world on wheels, when she can spin for
    know not their fathers, and therefore have no names.
  LAUNCE. Close at the heels of her virtues.
    in words is a woman's only virtue. I pray thee, out with't; and
  LAUNCE. I care not for that neither, because I love crusts.
  LAUNCE. Well, the best is, she hath no teeth to bite.
    another thing she may, and that cannot I help. Well, proceed.
  LAUNCE. Stop there; I'll have her; she was mine, and not mine,
  LAUNCE. More hair than wit. It may be; I'll prove it: the cover of
    the salt hides the salt, and therefore it is more than the salt;
    the hair that covers the wit is more than the wit, for the
    greater hides the less. What's next?
  LAUNCE. Why, that word makes the faults gracious. Well, I'll have
  SPEED. What then?
  LAUNCE. Why, then will I tell thee- that thy master stays for thee
    at the Northgate.
  LAUNCE. For thee! ay, who art thou? He hath stay'd for a better man
    than thee.
    going will scarce serve the turn.
    rejoice in the boy's correction.                        Exit
    Proteus, the good conceit I hold of thee-
    Makes me the better to confer with thee.
    What might we do to make the girl forget
    Therefore the office is indifferent,
    Much is the force of heaven-bred poesy.
  PROTEUS. Say that upon the altar of her beauty
    With some sweet consort; to their instruments
    Tune a deploring dump- the night's dead silence
    Let us into the city presently
    I have a sonnet that will serve the turn
    To give the onset to thy good advice.
  SECOND OUTLAW. If there be ten, shrink not, but down with 'em.
  SPEED. Sir, we are undone; these are the villains
    That all the travellers do fear so much.
    My riches are these poor habiliments,
    You take the sum and substance that I have.
  SECOND OUTLAW. Whither travel you?
  THIRD OUTLAW. Have you long sojourn'd there?
  FIRST OUTLAW. What, were you banish'd thence?
  SECOND OUTLAW. Have you the tongues?
  VALENTINE. My youthful travel therein made me happy,
  THIRD OUTLAW. By the bare scalp of Robin Hood's fat friar,
  SPEED. Master, be one of them; it's an honourable kind of thievery.
  THIRD OUTLAW. Know, then, that some of us are gentlemen,
    Such as the fury of ungovern'd youth
    Thrust from the company of awful men;
    An heir, and near allied unto the Duke.
    Who, in my mood, I stabb'd unto the heart.
  FIRST OUTLAW. And I for such-like petty crimes as these.
    But to the purpose- for we cite our faults
    That they may hold excus'd our lawless lives;
    Therefore, above the rest, we parley to you.
    Say 'ay' and be the captain of us all.
    We'll do thee homage, and be rul'd by thee,
    Love thee as our commander and our king.
    Come, go with us; we'll bring thee to our crews,
    And show thee all the treasure we have got;
Milan. Outside the DUKE'S palace, under SILVIA'S window
    Under the colour of commending him
    Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love
    Enter at a distance, HOST, and JULIA in boy's clothes
    hear music, and see the gentleman that you ask'd for.
  JULIA. Is he among these?
         And, being help'd, inhabits there.
           Upon the dull earth dwelling.
  JULIA. You mistake; the musician likes me not.
  JULIA. He plays false, father.
  HOST. How, out of tune on the strings?
  HOST. Hark, what fine change is in the music!
  JULIA. Ay, that change is the spite.
  HOST. You would have them always play but one thing?
  JULIA. Peace, stand aside; the company parts.
    That I despise thee for thy wrongful suit,
    Even for this time I spend in talking to thee.
  PROTEUS. Sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth.
  SILVIA. Go to thy lady's grave, and call hers thence;
    Or, at the least, in hers sepulchre thine.
    For, since the substance of your perfect self
    Send to me in the morning, and I'll send it;
    That wait for execution in the morn.
  JULIA. Not so; but it hath been the longest night
    That e'er I watch'd, and the most heaviest.           Exeunt
  EGLAMOUR. This is the hour that Madam Silvia
    I bear unto the banish'd Valentine;
    Nor how my father would enforce me marry
    Thyself hast lov'd; and I have heard thee say
    And, for the ways are dangerous to pass,
    Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour,
    And on the justice of my flying hence
    I do desire thee, even from a heart
    As full of sorrows as the sea of sands,
    If not, to hide what I have said to thee,
    Which since I know they virtuously are plac'd,
  LAUNCE. When a man's servant shall play the cur with him, look you,
    from drowning, when three or four of his blind brothers and
    sooner into the dining-chamber, but he steps me to her trencher
    judge. He thrusts me himself into the company of three or four
    gentleman-like dogs under the Duke's table; he had not been
    there, bless the mark, a pissing while but all the chamber smelt
    him. 'Out with the dog' says one; 'What cur is that?' says
    another; 'Whip him out' says the third; 'Hang him up' says the
    Duke. I, having been acquainted with the smell before, knew it
    was Crab, and goes me to the fellow that whips the dogs.
    'Friend,' quoth I 'you mean to whip the dog.' 'Ay, marry do I'
    quoth he. 'You do him the more wrong,' quoth I; "twas I did the
    the chamber. How many masters would do this for his servant? Nay,
    I'll be sworn, I have sat in the stock for puddings he hath
    stol'n, otherwise he had been executed; I have stood on the
    pillory for geese he hath kill'd, otherwise he had suffer'd
    for't. Thou think'st not of this now. Nay, I remember the trick
    thee still mark me and do as I do? When didst thou see me heave
               Enter PROTEUS, and JULIA in boy's clothes
  PROTEUS. Sebastian is thy name? I like thee well,
    And will employ thee in some service presently.
    Where have you been these two days loitering?
  LAUNCE. Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you bade me.
  LAUNCE. Ay, sir; the other squirrel was stol'n from me by the
    hangman's boys in the market-place; and then I offer'd her mine
    own, who is a dog as big as ten of yours, and therefore the gift
    the greater.
  PROTEUS. Go, get thee hence and find my dog again,
    Sebastian, I have entertained thee
    Therefore, know thou, for this I entertain thee.
    Go presently, and take this ring with thee,
  PROTEUS. Well, give her that ring, and therewithal
    I claim the promise for her heavenly picture.
    A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.
    To hear me speak the message I am sent on.
  SILVIA. Ursula, bring my picture there.
    This is the letter to your ladyship.
  SILVIA. I pray thee let me look on that again.
    I know they are stuff'd with protestations,
    Though his false finger have profan'd the ring,
    The air hath starv'd the roses in her cheeks
    And pinch'd the lily-tincture of her face,
    Our youth got me to play the woman's part,
    As if the garment had been made for me;
    That my poor mistress, moved therewithal,
  SILVIA. She is beholding to thee, gentle youth.
    Here, youth, there is my purse; I give thee this
    And yet the painter flatter'd her a little,
    If that be all the difference in his love,
    And were there sense in his idolatry
    I'll use thee kindly for thy mistress' sake,
    To make my master out of love with thee.                Exit
  EGLAMOUR. The sun begins to gild the western sky,
    And now it is about the very hour
    Unless it be to come before their time,
    So much they spur their expedition.
    Out at the postern by the abbey wall;
  JULIA.  [Aside]  But love will not be spurr'd to what it loathes.
  THURIO. Nay, then, the wanton lies; my face is black.
  PROTEUS. But pearls are fair; and the old saying is:
    For I had rather wink than look on them.
  PROTEUS. O, ay; and pities them.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  That such an ass should owe them.
  PROTEUS. That they are out by lease.
  JULIA. Here comes the Duke.
  PROTEUS. Neither.
  DUKE. Why then,
    'Tis true; for Friar Lawrence met them both
    As he in penance wander'd through the forest;
    At Patrick's cell this even; and there she was not.
    Upon the rising of the mountain foot
    That leads toward Mantua, whither they are fled.
    Than for the love of reckless Silvia.                   Exit
  FIRST OUTLAW. Where is the gentleman that was with her?
    Go thou with her to the west end of the wood;
  SILVIA. O Valentine, this I endure for thee!            Exeunt
Another part of the forest
    And to the nightingale's complaining notes
    Leave not the mansion so long tenantless,
    Lest, growing ruinous, the building fall
    These are my mates, that make their wills their law,
    To keep them from uncivil outrages.
    Withdraw thee, Valentine. Who's this comes here?
    I would have been a breakfast to the beast
    Rather than have false Proteus rescue me.
    And full as much, for more there cannot be,
    O, 'tis the curse in love, and still approv'd,
    When women cannot love where they're belov'd!
    For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith
  PROTEUS. Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words
    And love you 'gainst the nature of love- force ye.
  PROTEUS. I'll force thee yield to my desire.
    Is perjured to the bosom? Proteus,
    I am sorry I must never trust thee more,
    But count the world a stranger for thy sake.
    'Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!
    And once again I do receive thee honest.
    Is nor of heaven nor earth, for these are pleas'd;
    All that was mine in Silvia I give thee.
  PROTEUS. Look to the boy.
    What's the matter? Look up; speak.
  PROTEUS. How! let me see. Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.
    This is the ring you sent to Silvia.
    And Julia herself have brought it hither.
    How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root!
    O Proteus, let this habit make thee blush!
    It is the lesser blot, modesty finds,
    Women to change their shapes than men their minds.
  PROTEUS. Than men their minds! 'tis true. O heaven, were man
  VALENTINE. Come, come, a hand from either.
  VALENTINE. Forbear, forbear, I say; it is my lord the Duke.
    Come not within the measure of my wrath;
    Verona shall not hold thee. Here she stands
    I dare thee but to breathe upon my love.
    I claim her not, and therefore she is thine.
    Now, by the honour of my ancestry,
    And think thee worthy of an empress' love.
    Know then, I here forget all former griefs,
    Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again,
  VALENTINE. I thank your Grace; the gift hath made me happy.
    Forgive them what they have committed here,
    And let them be recall'd from their exile:
  DUKE. Thou hast prevail'd; I pardon them, and thee;
    Dispose of them as thou know'st their deserts.
  DUKE. I think the boy hath grace in him; he blushes.
  MAMILLIUS, his son, the young Prince of Sicilia
  OLD SHEPHERD, reputed father of Perdita
  EMILIA, a lady attending on the Queen
  Other Lords, Gentlemen, Ladies, Officers, Servants, Shepherds,
  ARCHIDAMUS. If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on the
  CAMILLO. I think this coming summer the King of Sicilia means to
    pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.
  ARCHIDAMUS. Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge: we
    unintelligent of our insufficience, may, though they cannot
    train'd together in their childhoods; and there rooted betwixt
    them then such an affection which cannot choose but branch now.
    Since their more mature dignities and royal necessities made
    separation of their society, their encounters, though not
    letters, loving embassies; that they have seem'd to be together,
    were from the ends of opposed winds. The heavens continue their
  ARCHIDAMUS. I think there is not in the world either malice or
    Prince Mamillius; it is a gentleman of the greatest promise that
  CAMILLO. I very well agree with you in the hopes of him. It is a
    gallant child; one that indeed physics the subject, makes old
    hearts fresh; they that went on crutches ere he was born desire
    yet their life to see him a man.
  ARCHIDAMUS. Would they else be content to die?
  CAMILLO. Yes; if there were no other excuse why they should desire
  ARCHIDAMUS. If the King had no son, they would desire to live on
  POLIXENES. Nine changes of the wat'ry star hath been
    Would be fill'd up, my brother, with our thanks;
    Go hence in debt. And therefore, like a cipher,
    And pay them when you part.
  LEONTES. We are tougher, brother,
  LEONTES. We'll part the time between's then; and in that
    Were there necessity in your request, although
    Farewell, our brother.
    But let him say so then, and let him go;
    adventure the borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
    To let him there a month behind the gest
    I love thee not a jar o' th' clock behind
    Though you would seek t' unsphere the stars with oaths,
    One of them you shall be.
  POLIXENES. Your guest, then, madam:
  HERMIONE. Not your gaoler then,
    You were pretty lordings then!
    Two lads that thought there was no more behind
    And bleat the one at th' other. What we chang'd
    Boldly 'Not guilty,' the imposition clear'd
  HERMIONE. By this we gather
    Temptations have since then been born to 's, for
    Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes
    I prithee tell me; cram's with praise, and make's
    Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death,
    Ere I could make thee open thy white hand
    And clap thyself my love; then didst thou utter
    Th' other for some while a friend.
    And well become the agent. 'T may, I grant;
    As now they are, and making practis'd smiles
    As in a looking-glass; and then to sigh, as 'twere
    And yet the steer, the heifer, and the calf,
  LEONTES. Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have,
    To be full like me; yet they say we are
    That will say anything. But were they false
    Affection! thy intention stabs the centre.
    And that to the infection of my brains
    What cheer? How is't with you, best brother?
    To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
    How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
  LEONTES. You will? Why, happy man be's dole! My brother,
    Now my sworn friend, and then mine enemy;
    How thou lov'st us show in our brother's welcome;
    We are yours i' th' garden. Shall's attend you there?
    Be you beneath the sky.  [Aside]  I am angling now,
    How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!
    And arms her with the boldness of a wife
    Go, play, boy, play; thy mother plays, and I
    And many a man there is, even at this present,
    Sir Smile, his neighbour. Nay, there's comfort in't,
    Whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd,
    As mine, against their will. Should all despair
    That hath revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
    Would hang themselves. Physic for't there's none;
    It will let in and out the enemy
    Have the disease, and feel't not. How now, boy!
  MAMILLIUS. I am like you, they say.
    What! Camillo there?
  CAMILLO. At the good Queen's entreaty.
  LEONTES. 'At the Queen's' be't. 'Good' should be pertinent;
    More than the common blocks. Not noted, is't,
    But of the finer natures, by some severals
  CAMILLO. To satisfy your Highness, and the entreaties
    Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
    With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
    Hast cleans'd my bosom- I from thee departed
    And therein negligent; or else a fool
    That seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn,
    In every one of these no man is free
    Among the infinite doings of the world,
    I play'd the fool, it was my negligence,
    Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
    To do a thing where I the issue doubted,
    Whereof the execution did cry out
    Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear
    Which oft infects the wisest. These, my lord,
    By its own visage; if I then deny it,
    To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought- then say
    Kissing with inside lip? Stopping the career
    Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
    Why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing;
    My is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings,
    I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee;
    Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
    Inclining to them both. Were my wife's liver
    To see alike mine honour as their profits,
    Their own particular thrifts, they would do that
    I have lov'd thee-
    Give scandal to the blood o' th' Prince, my son-
    Even for your son's sake; and thereby for sealing
    Go then; and with a countenance as clear
    Do't, and thou hast the one half of my heart;
    What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
    Is the obedience to a master; one
    Forsake the court. To do't, or no, is certain
  POLIXENES. What is the news i' th' court?
    Be intelligent to me? 'Tis thereabouts;
    I cannot name the disease; and it is caught
    Make me not sighted like the basilisk;
    I have look'd on thousands who have sped the better
    As you are certainly a gentleman; thereto
    I conjure thee, by all the parts of man
    Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least
  CAMILLO. By the King.
  POLIXENES. O, then my best blood turn
    Be yok'd with his that did betray the Best!
    Turn then my freshest reputation to
    A savour that may strike the dullest nostril
    Nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection
    By all their influences, you may as well
    Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
    If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
    Your followers I will whisper to the business;
    Clear them o' th' city. For myself, I'll put
    For, by the honour of my parents, I
    Than one condemn'd by the King's own mouth, thereon
  POLIXENES. I do believe thee:
    The gracious Queen, part of this theme, but nothing
    I will respect thee as a father, if
    The keys of all the posterns. Please your Highness
    To take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.             Exeunt
  HERMIONE. Take the boy to you; he so troubles me,
    Your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,
    Become some women best; so that there be not
    Too much hair there, but in a semicircle
    The Queen your mother rounds apace. We shall
    One of these days; and then you'd wanton with us,
  HERMIONE. Nay, come, sit down; then on.
  HERMIONE. Come on then,
  LEONTES. he met there? his train? Camillo with him?
  FIRST LORD. Behind the tuft of pines I met them; never
    Saw I men scour so on their way. I ey'd them
    Even to their ships.
    In being so blest! There may be in the cup
    With violent hefts. I have drunk, and seen the spider.
    For them to play at will. How came the posterns
    Give me the boy. I am glad you did not nurse him;
  LEONTES. Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her;
    Has made thee swell thus.
    The justice of your hearts will thereto ad
    The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands
    Virtue itself- these shrugs, these hum's and ha's,
    The most replenish'd villain in the world,
    Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,
    Betwixt the prince and beggar. I have said
    To this their late escape.
    You scarce can right me throughly then to say
    I must be patient till the heavens look
    Commonly are- the want of which vain dew
  LEONTES.  [To the GUARD]  Shall I be heard?
    Has deserv'd prison, then abound in tears
  FIRST LORD. Beseech your Highness, call the Queen again.
    Prove violence, in the which three great ones suffer,
    Please you t' accept it- that the Queen is spotless
    She's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where
    Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her;
    For every inch of woman in the world,
    That will be damn'd for't. Would I knew the villain!
    I have three daughters: the eldest is eleven;
    The second and the third, nine and some five;
    If this prove true, they'll pay for 't. By mine honour,
    I'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see
    And I had rather glib myself than they
    There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten
    Of the whole dungy earth.
  FIRST LORD. I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,
    Commune with you of this, but rather follow
    The loss, the gain, the ord'ring on't, is all
    Either thou art most ignorant by age,
    Added to their familiarity-
    But only seeing, all other circumstances
    Of stuff'd sufficiency. Now, from the oracle
    Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
    Give rest to th' minds of others such as he
    Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
    If the good truth were known.
  PAULINA. The keeper of the prison- call to him;
    No court in Europe is too good for thee;
    What dost thou then in prison?
                 Re-enter GENTLEMAN with the GAOLER
  PAULINA. Pray you, then,
    Conduct me to the Queen.
    To the contrary I have express commandment.
    To see her women- any of them? Emilia?
    To put apart these your attendants,
  PAULINA. Well, be't so, prithee.                   Exit GAOLER
    May hold together. On her frights and griefs,
    These dangerous unsafe lunes i' th' King, beshrew them!
    Commend my best obedience to the Queen;
    I'll show't the King, and undertake to be
    How he may soften at the sight o' th' child:
    A thriving issue; there is no lady living
    To visit the next room, I'll presently
    Acquaint the Queen of your most noble offer
    I'll to the Queen. Please you come something nearer.
  GAOLER. Madam, if't please the Queen to send the babe,
    This child was prisoner to the womb, and is
    By law and process of great Nature thence
    The anger of the King, nor guilty of,
    If any be, the trespass of the Queen.
    To bear the matter thus- mere weakness. If
    She, th' adultress; for the harlot king
    Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
    Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
    Might come to me again. Who's there?
  LEONTES. How does the boy?
    Conceiving the dishonour of his mother,
    Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself,
    Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow.
    They should not laugh if I could reach them; nor
  PAULINA. Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me.
    Than the Queen's life? A gracious innocent soul,
    Nourish the cause of his awaking: I
    Honest as either, to purge him of that humour
  LEONTES. What noise there, ho?
    I charg'd thee that she should not come about me;
    Unless he take the course that you have done-
    When she will take the rein, I let her run;
    A man, the worst about you.
                                         [Laying down the child]
    Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard.
    By thy Dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard;
    Tak'st up the Princess by that forced baseness
  PAULINA. So I would you did; then 'twere past all doubt
    Whose sting is sharper than the sword's; and will not-
    For, as the case now stands, it is a curse
    It is the issue of Polixenes.
    Hence with it, and together with the dam
    Commit them to the fire.
    So like you 'tis the worse. Behold, my lords,
    Although the print be little, the whole matter
    And copy of the father- eye, nose, lip,
    The trick of's frown, his forehead; nay, the valley,
    The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours
  ANTIGONUS. Hang all the husbands
  LEONTES. I'll ha' thee burnt.
    It is an heretic that makes the fire,
    Yea, scandalous to the world.
    Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
    A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands?
    The bastard brains with these my proper hands
    Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire;
    These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
    He is not guilty of her coming hither.
  LEONTES. I am a feather for each wind that blows.
    And call me father? Better burn it now
    Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.
    It shall not neither.  [To ANTIGONUS]  You, Sir, come you hither.
    With Lady Margery, your midwife there,
    I'll pawn the little blood which I have left
    To save the innocent- anything possible.
  LEONTES. Mark, and perform it- seest thou? For the fail
    Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
    Of our dominions; and that there thou leave it,
    And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune
    It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
    Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
    To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say,
    Casting their savageness aside, have done
    Poor thing, condemn'd to loss!           Exit with the child
    Another's issue.
  FIRST LORD. So please you, sir, their speed
Sicilia. On the road to the Capital
  CLEOMENES. The climate's delicate, the air most sweet,
    Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
    For most it caught me, the celestial habits-
    Methinks I so should term them- and the reverence
    Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!
  CLEOMENES. But of all, the burst
    And the ear-deaf'ning voice o' th' oracle,
    Prove as successful to the Queen- O, be't so!-
    The time is worth the use on't.
    Will clear or end the business. When the oracle-
    Shall the contents discover, something rare
    Even then will rush to knowledge. Go; fresh horses.
    And gracious be the issue!                            Exeunt
    Even pushes 'gainst our heart- the party tried,
    Even to the guilt or the purgation.
    Produce the prisoner.
  OFFICER. It is his Highness' pleasure that the Queen
  LEONTES. Read the indictment.
  OFFICER.  [Reads]  'Hermione, Queen to the worthy Leontes, King of
    conspiring with Camillo to take away the life of our sovereign
    lord the King, thy royal husband: the pretence whereof being by
    circumstances partly laid open, thou, Hermione, contrary to the
    faith and allegiance of true subject, didst counsel and aid them,
    for their better safety, to fly away by night.'
    The testimony on my part no other
    Behold our human actions, as they do,
    I doubt not then but innocence shall make
    A fellow of the royal bed, which owe
    A moiety of the throne, a great king's daughter,
    The mother to a hopeful prince- here standing
    That way inclining, hard'ned be the hearts
    That any of these bolder vices wanted
    Less impudence to gainsay what they did
    So and no other, as yourself commanded;
    And why he left your court, the gods themselves,
    My life stands in the level of your dreams,
    No father owning it- which is indeed
    More criminal in thee than it- so thou
    I do refer me to the oracle:
    Is altogether just. Therefore, bring forth,
  HERMIONE. The Emperor of Russia was my father;
    Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
    This seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd
    Of great Apollo's priest; and that since then
    You have not dar'd to break the holy seal
    Nor read the secrets in't.
  LEONTES. Break up the seals and read.
    babe truly begotten; and the King shall live without an heir, if
  LORDS. Now blessed be the great Apollo!
  SERVANT. My lord the King, the King!
  LEONTES. What is the business?
    Of the Queen's speed, is gone.
  LEONTES. Apollo's angry; and the heavens themselves
    How now, there!
  PAULINA. This news is mortal to the Queen. Look down
    New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo-
    Camillo for the minister to poison
    But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
    Which you knew great, and to the certain hazard
    Does my deeds make the blacker!
  PAULINA. Woe the while!
    Together working with thy jealousies,
    For girls of nine- O, think what they have done,
    And then run mad indeed, stark mad; for all
    That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant,
    Nor is't directly laid to thee, the death
    Of the young Prince, whose honourable thoughts-
    Thoughts high for one so tender- cleft the heart
    Laid to thy answer; but the last- O lords,
    When I have said, cry 'Woe!'- the Queen, the Queen,
    As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant!
    Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
    Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee
    Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
    In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
    All tongues to talk their bitt'rest.
    Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault
    All faults I make, when I shall come to know them.
    At my petition; I beseech you, rather
    When most the truth; which I receive much better
    Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me
    To the dead bodies of my queen and son.
    One grave shall be for both. Upon them shall
    The causes of their death appear, unto
    The chapel where they lie; and tears shed there
    To these sorrows.                                     Exeunt
Enter ANTIGONUS with the CHILD, and a MARINER
  ANTIGONUS. Thou art perfect then our ship hath touch'd upon
    We have landed in ill time; the skies look grimly
    I call upon thee.
    Too far i' th' land; 'tis like to be loud weather;
    Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
    I have heard, but not believ'd, the spirits o' th' dead
    May walk again. If such thing be, thy mother
    Sometimes her head on one side some another-
    Became two spouts; the fury spent, anon
    Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
    There weep, and leave it crying; and, for the babe
    I prithee call't. For this ungentle business,
    Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see
    Apollo would, this being indeed the issue
    Either for life or death, upon the earth
    Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well!
                                         [Laying down the child]
    There lie, and there thy character; there these
    Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
    That for thy mother's fault art thus expos'd
    Well may I get aboard! This is the chase;
  SHEPHERD. I would there were no age between ten and three and
    twenty, or that youth would sleep out the rest; for there is
    nothing in the between but getting wenches with child, wronging
    the ancientry, stealing, fighting-  [Horns]  Hark you now! Would
    any but these boil'd brains of nineteen and two and twenty hunt
    this weather? They have scar'd away two of my best sheep, which I
    fear the wolf will sooner find than the master. If any where I
    have them, 'tis by the sea-side, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an't
    be thy will! What have we here?  [Taking up the child]  Mercy
    bookish, yet I can read waiting-gentlewoman in the scape. This
    they were warmer that got this than the poor thing is here. I'll
    thou art dead and rotten, come hither. What ail'st thou, man?
    not to say it is a sea, for it is now the sky; betwixt the
    takes up the shore! But that's not to the point. O, the most
    piteous cry of the poor souls! Sometimes to see 'em, and not to
    see 'em; now the ship boring the moon with her mainmast, and anon
    hogshead. And then for the land service- to see how the bear tore
    name was Antigonus, a nobleman! But to make an end of the ship-
    to see how the sea flap-dragon'd it; but first, how the poor
    souls roared, and the sea mock'd them; and how the poor gentleman
    roared, and the bear mock'd him, both roaring louder than the sea
    or weather.
  CLOWN. Now, now; I have not wink'd since I saw these sights; the
    men are not yet cold under water, nor the bear half din'd on the
  SHEPHERD. Would I had been by to have help'd the old man!
  CLOWN. I would you had been by the ship-side, to have help'd her;
    there your charity would have lack'd footing.
  SHEPHERD. Heavy matters, heavy matters! But look thee here, boy.
    new-born. Here's a sight for thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for
    a squire's child! Look thee here; take up, take up, boy; open't.
    So, let's see- it was told me I should be rich by the fairies.
  CLOWN. You're a made old man; if the sins of your youth are
    keep it close. Home, home, the next way! We are lucky, boy; and
    Come, good boy, the next way home.
  CLOWN. Go you the next way with your findings. I'll go see if the
    bear be gone from the gentleman, and how much he hath eaten. They
    are never curst but when they are hungry. If there be any of him
Enter TIME, the CHORUS
    Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
    O'er sixteen years, and leave the growth untried
    The times that brought them in; so shall I do
  POLIXENES. I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate: 'tis
    a sickness denying thee anything; a death to grant this.
    for the most part been aired abroad, I desire to lay my bones
    there. Besides, the penitent King, my master, hath sent for me;
    think so, which is another spur to my departure.
  POLIXENES. As thou lov'st me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of thy
    services by leaving me now. The need I have of thee thine own
    goodness hath made. Better not to have had thee than thus to want
    thee; thou, having made me businesses which none without thee can
    sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute them thyself, or
    take away with thee the very services thou hast done; which if I
    thankful to thee shall be my study; and my profit therein the
    heaping friendships. Of that fatal country Sicilia, prithee,
    speak no more; whose very naming punishes me with the remembrance
    brother; whose loss of his most precious queen and children are
    even now to be afresh lamented. Say to me, when saw'st thou the
    Prince Florizel, my son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue
    not being gracious, than they are in losing them when they have
    approved their virtues.
  CAMILLO. Sir, it is three days since I saw the Prince. What his
    seldom from the house of a most homely shepherd- a man, they say,
    that from very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his
  POLIXENES. That's likewise part of my intelligence; but, I fear, the
    angle that plucks our son thither. Thou shalt accompany us to the
    question with the shepherd; from whose simplicity I think it not
    uneasy to get the cause of my son's resort thither. Prithee be my
    present partner in this business, and lay aside the thoughts of
Bohemia. A road near the SHEPHERD'S cottage
        With heigh! the doxy over the dale,
      Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year,
        For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale.
      The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
        With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing!
        With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the jay,
        While we lie tumbling in the hay.
      And when I wander here and there,
        I then do most go right.
        And bear the sow-skin budget,
        And in the stocks avouch it.
    My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to lesser linen.
    My father nam'd me Autolycus; who, being, I as am, litter'd under
    die and drab I purchas'd this caparison; and my revenue is the
    silly-cheat. Gallows and knock are too powerful on the highway;
    beating and hanging are terrors to me; for the life to come, I
    sleep out the thought of it. A prize! a prize!
  CLOWN. Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every tod yields pound
    and odd shilling; fifteen hundred shorn, what comes the wool to?
  AUTOLYCUS.  [Aside]  If the springe hold, the cock's mine.
    rice? But my father hath made her mistress of the feast, and she
    lays it on. She hath made me four and twenty nosegays for the
    shearers- three-man song-men all, and very good ones; but they
    are most of them means and bases; but one Puritan amongst them,
    the warden pies; mace; dates- none, that's out of my note;
  AUTOLYCUS.  [Grovelling on the ground]  O that ever I was born!
  AUTOLYCUS. O, help me, help me! Pluck but off these rags; and then,
    thee, rather than have these off.
  AUTOLYCUS. O sir, the loathsomeness of them offend me more than the
    from me, and these detestable things put upon me.
  CLOWN. Indeed, he should be a footman, by the garments he has left
    with thee; if this be a horseman's coat, it hath seen very hot
    service. Lend me thy hand, I'll help thee. Come, lend me thy
  CLOWN. Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.
    going; I shall there have money or anything I want. Offer me no
    troll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of the Prince. I cannot
    certainly whipt out of the court.
  CLOWN. His vices, you would say; there's no virtue whipt out of the
    court. They cherish it to make it stay there; and yet it will no
    been since an ape-bearer; then a process-server, a bailiff; then
    he compass'd a motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's
  AUTOLYCUS. Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue that put
  CLOWN. Shall I bring thee on the way?
  CLOWN. Then fare thee well. I must go buy spices for our
    out another, and the shearers prove sheep, let me be unroll'd,
    and my name put in the book of virtue!
            Jog on, jog on, the footpath way,
              And merrily hent the stile-a;
            A merry heart goes all the day,
    Is as a meeting of the petty gods,
    And you the Queen on't.
    O, pardon that I name them! Your high self,
    In every mess have folly, and the feeders
  FLORIZEL. I bless the time
    Thy father's ground.
    To me the difference forges dread; your greatness
    To think your father, by some accident,
    Should pass this way, as you did. O, the Fates!
    Should I, in these my borrowed flaunts, behold
    Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves,
    Humbling their deities to love, have taken
    The shapes of beasts upon them: Jupiter
    Became a bull and bellow'd; the green Neptune
    A ram and bleated; and the fire-rob'd god,
    Oppos'd, as it must be, by th' pow'r of the King.
    One of these two must be necessities,
    Which then will speak, that you must change this purpose,
    With these forc'd thoughts, I prithee, darken not
    Or not my father's; for I cannot be
    Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing
    That you behold the while. Your guests are coming.
    Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
    Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
    With labour, and the thing she took to quench it
    The hostess of the meeting. Pray you bid
    It is my father's will I should take on me
    Give me those flow'rs there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs,
    For you there's rosemary and rue; these keep
    Seeming and savour all the winter long.
  PERDITA. Sir, the year growing ancient,
    Not yet on summer's death nor on the birth
    Of trembling winter, the fairest flow'rs o' th' season
    To get slips of them.
    Do you neglect them?
    There is an art which in their piedness shares
  POLIXENES. Say there be;
    A gentler scion to the wildest stock,
    Which does mend nature- change it rather; but
    And do not call them bastards.
    The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;
    This youth should say 'twere well, and only therefore
    And with him rises weeping; these are flow'rs
    Of middle summer, and I think they are given
    From the flowers now that, frighted, thou let'st fall
    That come before the swallow dares, and take
    But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes
    Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses,
    That die unmarried ere they can behold
    The flow'r-de-luce being one. O, these I lack
    Methinks I play as I have seen them do
    Pray so; and, for the ord'ring your affairs,
    To sing them too. When you do dance, I wish you
    And own no other function. Each your doing,
    Crowns what you are doing in the present deeds,
    And the true blood which peeps fairly through't,
    You woo'd me the false way.
  POLIXENES. This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever
    Ran on the green-sward; nothing she does or seems
    I think so too; for never gaz'd the moon
    Upon the water as he'll stand and read,
    I think there is not half a kiss to choose
    Who loves another best.
  SERVANT. O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the door, you
    would never dance again after a tabor and pipe; no, the bagpipe
    tell money; he utters them as he had eaten ballads, and all men's
    can so fit his customers with gloves. He has the prettiest
    mean mischief, and break a foul gap into the matter, he makes the
  SERVANT. He hath ribbons of all the colours i' th' rainbow; points,
    more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can learnedly handle, though
    they come to him by th' gross; inkles, caddisses, cambrics,
    lawns. Why he sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses; you
    would think a smock were she-angel, he so chants to the
    sleeve-hand and the work about the square on't.
  CLOWN. Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.
  CLOWN. You have of these pedlars that have more in them than you'd
  PERDITA. Ay, good brother, or go about to think.
           For my lads to give their dears;
    money of me; but being enthrall'd as I am, it will also be the
  MOPSA. I was promis'd them against the feast; but they come not too
  DORCAS. He hath promis'd you more than that, or there be liars.
  CLOWN. Is there no manners left among maids? Will they wear their
    plackets where they should bear their faces? Is there not
    off these secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all our
    guests? 'Tis well they are whisp'ring. Clammer your tongues, and
  CLOWN. Have I not told thee how I was cozen'd by the way, and lost
  AUTOLYCUS. And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad; therefore it
    then we are sure they are true.
  AUTOLYCUS. Here's the midwife's name to't, one Mistress Taleporter,
    buy the other things anon.
  AUTOLYCUS. Here's another ballad, of a fish that appeared upon the
    coast on Wednesday the fourscore of April, forty thousand fathom
    above water, and sung this ballad against the hard hearts of
  CLOWN. Lay it by too. Another.
  AUTOLYCUS. Why, this is a passing merry one, and goes to the tune
  DORCAS. We had the tune on't a month ago.
  DORCAS.    Whither?
  MOPSA.       O, whither?
  DORCAS.        Whither?
  DORCAS.    Me too! Let me go thither
  DORCAS.    If to either, thou dost ill.
  AUTOLYCUS. Neither.
  DORCAS.    What, neither?
  AUTOLYCUS. Neither.
             Then whither goest? Say, whither?
  CLOWN. We'll have this song out anon by ourselves; my father and
    the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll not trouble them. Come,
    Pedlar, let's have the first choice. Follow me, girls.
           Of the new'st and fin'st, fin'st wear-a?
             Come to the pedlar;
  SERVANT. Master, there is three carters, three shepherds, three
    neat-herds, three swineherds, that have made themselves all men
    of hair; they call themselves Saltiers, and they have dance which
    the wenches say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are not
    in't; but they themselves are o' th' mind, if it be not too rough
  POLIXENES. You weary those that refresh us. Pray, let's see these
  SERVANT. One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath danc'd
    before the King; and not the worst of the three but jumps twelve
  SHEPHERD. Leave your prating; since these good men are pleas'd, let
    them come in; but quickly now.
  SERVANT. Why, they stay at door, sir.                     Exit
  POLIXENES.  [To SHEPHERD]  O, father, you'll know more of that
    [To CAMILLO]  Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.
    She prizes not such trifles as these are.
    But not deliver'd. O, hear me breathe my life
    Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd snow that's bolted
    By th' northern blasts twice o'er.
    How prettily the young swain seems to wash
    Than he, and men- the earth, the heavens, and all:
    That, were I crown'd the most imperial monarch,
    Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
    More than was ever man's, I would not prize them
    Without her love; for her employ them all;
    Commend them and condemn them to her service
    Or to their own perdition.
    Say you the like to him?
    Enough then for your wonder. But come on,
    Contract us fore these witnesses.
    Have you a father?
  FLORIZEL. He neither does nor shall.
  POLIXENES. Methinks a father
    Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
    That best becomes the table. Pray you, once more,
    Is not your father grown incapable
    The father- all whose joy is nothing else
    But, for some other reasons, my grave sir,
    My father of this business.
  POLIXENES. Prithee let him.
    I am sorry that by hanging thee I can but
    More homely than thy state. For thee, fond boy,
    I mean thou shalt- we'll bar thee from succession;
    Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
    Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time,
    Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
    From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment,
    That makes himself, but for our honour therein,
    Unworthy thee- if ever henceforth thou
    I will devise a death as cruel for thee
    Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,
  CAMILLO. Why, how now, father!
    To die upon the bed my father died,
    That knew'st this was the Prince, and wouldst adventure
    You know your father's temper. At this time
    Then, till the fury of his Highness settle,
    The violation of my faith; and then
    Let nature crush the sides o' th' earth together
    And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks.
    From my succession wipe me, father; I
    Will thereto be obedient, I have reason;
    Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
    Be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or
    The close earth wombs, or the profound seas hides
    As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend,
    Tug for the time to come. This you may know,
    Concern me the reporting.
    Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
    That I have borne your father?
    Have you deserv'd. It is my father's music
    To have them recompens'd as thought on.
    If you may please to think I love the King,
    Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see,
    Your discontenting father strive to qualify,
    That I may call thee something more than man,
    And after that trust to thee.
    Ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies
    And there present yourself and your fair princess-
    His welcomes forth; asks thee there 'Son, forgiveness!'
    As 'twere i' th' father's person; kisses the hands
    He chides to hell, and bids the other grow
  CAMILLO. Sent by the King your father
    What you as from your father shall deliver,
    But that you have your father's bosom there
    But as you shake off one to take another;
    Do their best office if they can but stay you
    Prosperity's the very bond of love,
    Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
  PERDITA. One of these is true:
    I think affliction may subdue the cheek,
    But not take in the mind.
    There shall not at your father's house these seven years
    Be born another such.
    But, O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo-
    Preserver of my father, now of me;
    Do all lie there. It shall be so my care
    brother, a very simple gentleman! I have sold all my trumpery;
    benediction to the buyer; by which means I saw whose purse was
    love with the wenches' song that he would not stir his pettitoes
    till he had both tune and words, which so drew the rest of the
    herd to me that all their other senses stuck in ears. You might
    the nothing of it. So that in this time of lethargy I pick'd and
    cut most of their festival purses; and had not the old man come
    in with whoobub against his daughter and the King's son and
    scar'd my choughs from the chaff, I had not left a purse alive in
    the whole army.
  CAMILLO. Nay, but my letters, by this means being there
  CAMILLO. Shall satisfy your father.
  AUTOLYCUS.  [Aside]  If they have overheard me now- why, hanging.
    Fear not, man; here's no harm intended to thee.
  CAMILLO. Why, be so still; here's nobody will steal that from thee.
    Yet for the outside of thy poverty we must make an exchange;
    therefore discase thee instantly- thou must think there's a
    the pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee, there's
  CAMILLO. Nay, prithee dispatch. The gentleman is half flay'd
  AUTOLYCUS. Are you in camest, sir?  [Aside]  I smell the trick
  FLORIZEL. Dispatch, I prithee.
    Into some covert; take your sweetheart's hat
  PERDITA. I see the play so lies
    Have you done there?
  FLORIZEL. Should I now meet my father,
  CAMILLO.  [Aside]  What I do next shall be to tell the King
    Of this escape, and whither they are bound;
  CAMILLO. The swifter speed the better.
  AUTOLYCUS. I understand the business, I hear it. To have an open
    th' other senses. I see this is the time that the unjust man doth
    is here with this exchange! Sure, the gods do this year connive
    about a piece of iniquity- stealing away from his father with his
    acquaint the King withal, I would not do't. I hold it the more
    knavery to conceal it; and therein am I constant to my
  CLOWN. See, see; what a man you are now! There is no other way but
    to tell the King she's a changeling and none of your flesh and
  SHEPHERD. Go to, then.
    has not offended the King; and so your flesh and blood is not to
    let the law go whistle; I warrant you.
  SHEPHERD. I will tell the King all, every word- yea, and his son's
    pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man, neither to his
    father nor to me, to go about to make me the King's
    brother-in-law.
  CLOWN. Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you could have
    been to him; and then your blood had been the dearer by I know
  SHEPHERD. Well, let us to the King. There is that in this fardel
    be to the flight of my master.
    [Takes off his false beard]  How now, rustics! Whither are you
  AUTOLYCUS. Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition of
    that fardel, the place of your dwelling, your names, your ages,
    becomes none but tradesmen, and they often give us soldiers the
    lie; but we pay them for it with stamped coin, not stabbing
    steel; therefore they do not give us the lie.
    taken yourself with the manner.
  AUTOLYCUS. Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest thou
    not the air of the court in these enfoldings? Hath not my gait in
    it the measure of the court? Receives not thy nose court-odour
    thou, for that I insinuate, that toaze from thee thy business, I
    am therefore no courtier? I am courtier cap-a-pe, and one that
    will either push on or pluck back thy business there; whereupon I
    command the to open thy affair.
  SHEPHERD. My business, sir, is to the King.
  CLOWN. Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant; say you have none.
    Yet nature might have made me as these are,
  SHEPHERD. His garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.
  CLOWN. He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical.
    A great man, I'll warrant; I know by the picking on's teeth.
  AUTOLYCUS. The fardel there? What's i' th' fardel? Wherefore that
  SHEPHERD. Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box which
    none must know but the King; and which he shall know within this
  AUTOLYCUS. The King is not at the palace; he is gone aboard a new
    capable of things serious, thou must know the King is full of
  AUTOLYCUS. If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly; the
    curses he shall have, the tortures he shall feel, will break the
    back of man, the heart of monster.
    remov'd fifty times, shall all come under the hangman- which,
    sheep-cote!- all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
  CLOWN. Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear, an't like you,
  AUTOLYCUS. He has a son- who shall be flay'd alive; then 'nointed
    over with honey, set on the head of a wasp's nest; then stand
    till he be three quarters and a dram dead; then recover'd again
    with aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as he is,
    and in the hottest day prognostication proclaims, shall he be set
    against a brick wall, the sun looking with a southward eye upon
    what talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries are to be
    smil'd at, their offences being so capital? Tell me, for you seem
    to be honest plain men, what you have to the King. Being
    and if it be in man besides the King to effect your suits, here
    by the nose with gold. Show the inside of your purse to the
  SHEPHERD. An't please you, sir, to undertake the business for us,
  AUTOLYCUS. Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this
  AUTOLYCUS. O, that's the case of the shepherd's son! Hang him,
  CLOWN. Comfort, good comfort! We must to the King and show our
    old man does, when the business is performed; and remain, as he
  AUTOLYCUS. I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side; go on
    the right-hand; I will but look upon the hedge, and follow you.
    double occasion- gold, and a means to do the Prince my master
    will bring these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him. If he
    think it fit to shore them again, and that the complaint they
    have to the King concerns him nothing, let him call me rogue for
    what shame else belongs to't. To him will I present them. There
    More penitence than done trespass. At the last,
    Do as the heavens have done: forget your evil;
    With them forgive yourself.
    My blemishes in them, and so still think of
    Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man
    If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
    Or from the all that are took something good
    Have done the time more benefit, and grac'd
    You pity not the state, nor the remembrance
    Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
    To bless the bed of majesty again
    Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods
    Will have fulfill'd their secret purposes;
    For has not the divine Apollo said,
    Is't not the tenour of his oracle,
    Did perish with the infant. 'Tis your counsel
    My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
    Oppose against their wills.  [To LEONTES]  Care not for issue;
    Was like to be the best.
    Who hast the memory of Hermione,
  PAULINA. And left them
    More rich for what they yielded.
    No more such wives; therefore, no wife. One worse,
    Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'd bid you mark
    You chose her; then I'd shriek, that even your ears
    Should rift to hear me; and the words that follow'd
  PAULINA. Unless another,
    No remedy but you will- give me the office
    Never till then.
    Like to his father's greatness. His approach,
  GENTLEMAN. Ay; the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
    That e'er the sun shone bright on.
    Is colder than that theme: 'She had not been,
    The other, when she has obtain'd your eye,
    Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
    Bring them to our embracement.                        Exeunt
    Well with this lord; there was not full a month
    Between their births.
  LEONTES. Prithee no more; cease. Thou know'st
    Your mother was most true to wedlock, Prince;
    For she did print your royal father off,
    Your father's image is so hit in you
    His very air, that I should call you brother,
    You, gracious couple, do. And then I lost-
    All mine own folly- the society,
    Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
    Can send his brother; and, but infirmity,
    He bade me say so, more than all the sceptres
    And those that bear them living.
  LEONTES. O my brother-
    Good gentleman!- the wrongs I have done thee stir
    Afresh within me; and these thy offices,
    Of my behind-hand slackness! Welcome hither,
    As is the spring to th' earth. And hath he too
    At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
  LEONTES. Where the warlike Smalus,
  FLORIZEL. Most royal sir, from thence; from him whose daughter
    His tears proclaim'd his, parting with her; thence,
    To execute the charge my father gave me
    Do climate here! You have a holy father,
    For which the heavens, taking angry note,
    Have left me issueless; and your father's blest,
    Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
    Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with
    Whiles he was hast'ning- in the chase, it seems,
    Of this fair couple- meets he on the way
    The father of this seeming lady and
    Her brother, having both their country quitted
    Endur'd all weathers.
    He's with the King your father.
    Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
    Wretches so quake. They kneel, they kiss the earth;
    Forswear themselves as often as they speak.
    Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
  PERDITA. O my poor father!
    The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first.
    Is this the daughter of a king?
  LEONTES. That 'once,' I see by your good father's speed,
    Should chase us with my father, pow'r no jot
    My father will grant precious things as trifles.
    Even in these looks I made.  [To FLORIZEL]  But your petition
    Is yet unanswer'd. I will to your father.
    I am friend to them and you. Upon which errand
    I now go toward him; therefore, follow me,
Sicilia. Before the palace of LEONTES
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the
    old shepherd deliver the manner how he found it; whereupon, after
    a little amazedness, we were all commanded out of the chamber;
    only this, methought I heard the shepherd say he found the child.
  AUTOLYCUS. I would most gladly know the issue of it.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. I make a broken delivery of the business; but the
    changes I perceived in the King and Camillo were very notes of
    admiration. They seem'd almost, with staring on one another, to
    tear the cases of their eyes; there was speech in their dumbness,
    language in their very gesture; they look'd as they had heard of
    appeared in them; but the wisest beholder that knew no more but
    the extremity of the one it must needs be.
                    Enter another GENTLEMAN
    the King's daughter is found. Such a deal of wonder is broken out
                    Enter another GENTLEMAN
    Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward; he can deliver you more.
    an old tale that the verity of it is in strong suspicion. Has the
    circumstance. That which you hear you'll swear you see, there is
    such unity in the proofs. The mantle of Queen Hermione's; her
    jewel about the neck of it; the letters of Antigonus found with
    it, which they know to be his character; the majesty of the
    creature in resemblance of the mother; the affection of nobleness
    which nature shows above her breeding; and many other evidences-
    proclaim her with all certainty to be the King's daughter. Did
    you see the meeting of the two kings?
    another, so and in such manner that it seem'd sorrow wept to take
    leave of them; for their joy waded in tears. There was casting up
    distraction that they were to be known by garment, not by favour.
    mother, thy mother!' then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then embraces
    his son-in-law; then again worries he his daughter with clipping
    her. Now he thanks the old shepherd, which stands by like a
    weather-bitten conduit of many kings' reigns. I never heard of
    such another encounter, which lames report to follow it and
    hence the child?
    torn to pieces with a bear. This avouches the shepherd's son, who
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Wreck'd the same instant of their master's death,
    and in the view of the shepherd; so that all the instruments
    which aided to expose the child were even then lost when it was
    found. But, O, the noble combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was
    fought in Paulina! She had one eye declin'd for the loss of her
    husband, another elevated that the oracle was fulfill'd. She
    lifted the Princess from the earth, and so locks her in embracing
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. The dignity of this act was worth the audience of
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. One of the prettiest touches of all, and that
    which angl'd for mine eyes- caught the water, though not the
    fish- was, when at the relation of the Queen's death, with the
    manner how she came to't bravely confess'd and lamented by the
    of dolour to another, she did with an 'Alas!'- I would fain say-
    marble there changed colour; some swooned, all sorrowed. If all
    the world could have seen't, the woe had been universal.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Are they returned to the court?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. No. The Princess hearing of her mother's statue,
    which is in the keeping of Paulina- a piece many years in doing
    her ape. He so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that they say
    one would speak to her and stand in hope of answer- thither with
    all greediness of affection are they gone, and there they intend
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. I thought she had some great matter there in
    the death of Hermione, visited that removed house. Shall we
    thither, and with our company piece the rejoicing?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Who would be thence that has the benefit of
  AUTOLYCUS. Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me, would
    preferment drop on my head. I brought the old man and his son
    aboard the Prince; told him I heard them talk of a fardel and I
    know not what; but he at that time over-fond of the shepherd's
    daughter- so he then took her to be- who began to be much
    sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of weather
    to me; for had I been the finder-out of this secret, it would not
    have relish'd among my other discredits.
    appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.
    other day, because I was no gentleman born. See you these
    clothes? Say you see them not and think me still no gentleman
    born. You were best say these robes are not gentlemen born. Give
    me the lie, do; and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.
  CLOWN. Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.
  CLOWN. So you have; but I was a gentleman born before my father;
    for the King's son took me by the hand and call'd me brother; and
    then the two kings call'd my father brother; and then the Prince,
    my brother, and the Princess, my sister, call'd my father father.
    And so we wept; and there was the first gentleman-like tears that
  AUTOLYCUS. I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the faults I
    to the Prince my master.
  SHEPHERD. Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are
  CLOWN. Give me thy hand. I will swear to the Prince thou art as
    the behalf of his friend. And I'll swear to the Prince thou art a
    trust me not. Hark! the kings and the princes, our kindred, are
    going to see the Queen's picture. Come, follow us; we'll be thy
  LEONTES. O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
    That I have had of thee!
    With your crown'd brother and these your contracted
    To see the statue of our queen. Your gallery
    The statue of her mother.
    Or hand of man hath done; therefore I keep it
    To see the life as lively mock'd as ever
    I like your silence; it the more shows off
    Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she
  PAULINA. So much the more our carver's excellence,
    I am asham'd. Does not the stone rebuke me
    From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
    Standing like stone with thee!
    I kneel, and then implore her blessing. Lady,
    The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's
  POLIXENES. Dear my brother,
    Let him that was the cause of this have pow'r
    If I had thought the sight of my poor image
    Would thus have wrought you- for the stone is mine-
  LEONTES. Do not draw the curtain.
  PAULINA. I'll draw the curtain.
    Make me to think so twenty years together!
    No settled senses of the world can match
    I could afflict you farther.
    With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?
  LEONTES. No, not these twenty years.
  PAULINA. Either forbear,
    Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
    I'll make the statue move indeed, descend,
    And take you by the hand, but then you'll think-
    I am about, let them depart.
                         [HERMIONE comes down from the pedestal]
    Until you see her die again; for then
    Is she become the suitor?
    Or how stol'n from the dead.
    And pray your mother's blessing. Turn, good lady;
    Thy father's court? For thou shalt hear that I,
    Knowing by Paulina that the oracle
    Myself to see the issue.
    Lest they desire upon this push to trouble
    Your joys with like relation. Go together,
    Will wing me to some wither'd bough, and there
    For him, I partly know his mind- to find thee
    And take her by the hand whose worth and honesty
    What! look upon my brother. Both your pardons,
    And son unto the King, whom heavens directing,
  And down I laid to list the sad-tuned tale,
  Which fortified her visage from the sun,
  Whereon the thought might think sometime it saw
  Time had not scythed all that youth begun,
  Laund'ring the silken figures in the brine
  Sometimes her levelled eyes their carriage ride,
  As they did batt'ry to the spheres intend;
  Sometime diverted their poor balls are tied
  To th' orbed earth; sometimes they do extend
  Their view right on; anon their gazes lend
  And, true to bondage, would not break from thence,
  Which she perused, sighed, tore, and gave the flood;
  Bidding them find their sepulchres in mud;
  Enswathed and sealed to curious secrecy.
  These often bathed she in her fluxive eyes,
  This said, in top of rage the lines she rents,
  Big discontents so breaking their contents.
  Sometime a blusterer that the ruffle knew
  The swiftest hours observed as they flew,
  In brief the grounds and motives of her woe.
  If that from him there may be aught applied
  'Tis promised in the charity of age.
  'Father,' she says, 'though in me you behold
  And every light occasion of the wind
  Upon his lips their silken parcels hurls.
  Each eye that saw him did enchant the mind;
  Whose bare out-bragged the web it seemed to wear:
  For maiden-tongued he was, and thereof free;
  When winds breathe sweet, unruly though they be.
  Proud of subjection, noble by the sway,
  Whether the horse by him became his deed,
  'But quickly on this side the verdict went:
  All aids, themselves made fairer by their place,
  Came for additions; yet their purposed trim
  'So on the tip of his subduing tongue
  To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep,
  He had the dialect and different skill,
  'That he did in the general bosom reign
  Asked their own wills, and made their wills obey.
  'Many there were that did his picture get,
  To serve their eyes, and in it put their mind;
  The goodly objects which abroad they find
  Of lands and mansions, theirs in thought assigned;
  And labouring in moe pleasures to bestow them
  Than the true gouty landlord which doth owe them.
  Sweetly supposed them mistress of his heart.
  Reserved the stalk and gave him all my flower.
  Of proofs new-bleeding, which remained the foil
  To put the by-past perils in her way?
  That we must curb it upon others' proof,
  To be forbod the sweets that seems so good
  'For further I could say this man's untrue,
  And knew the patterns of his foul beguiling;
  Heard where his plants in others' orchards grew;
  'And long upon these terms I held my city,
  Are errors of the blood, none of the mind;
  Love made them not; with acture they may be,
  Where neither party is nor true nor kind.
  They sought their shame that so their shame did find;
  By how much of me their reproach contains.
  '"Among the many that mine eyes have seen,
  Harm have I done to them, but ne'er was harmed;
  Figuring that they their passions likewise lent me
  In bloodless white and the encrimsoned mood-
  '"And, lo, behold these talents of their hair,
  With the annexions of fair gems enriched,
  Weak sights their sickly radiance do amend;
  The heaven-hued sapphire and the opal blend
  '"Lo, all these trophies of affections hot,
  Of pensived and subdued desires the tender,
  Nature hath charged me that I hoard them not,
  But yield them up where I myself must render-
  For these, of force, must your oblations be,
  Since I their altar, you enpatron me.
  '"O then advance of yours that phraseless hand
  Whose white weighs down the airy scale of praise;
  Take all these similes to your own command,
  Whose rarest havings made the blossoms dote;
  But kept cold distance, and did thence remove
  Playing the place which did no form receive,
  The scars of battle scapeth by the flight,
  Upon the moment did her force subdue,
  And now she would the caged cloister fly.
  '"How mighty then you are, O hear me tell!
  Have emptied all their fountains in my well,
  I strong o'er them, and you o'er me being strong,
  Believed her eyes when they t'assail begun,
  In thee hath neither sting, knot, nor confine,
  And sweetens, in the suff'ring pangs it bears,
  '"Now all these hearts that do on mine depend,
  Feeling it break, with bleeding groans they pine,
  And supplicant their sighs to your extend,
  To leave the batt'ry that you make 'gainst mine,
  Whose sights till then were levelled on my face;
  O, how the channel to the stream gave grace!
  Who glazed with crystal gate the glowing roses
  That flame through water which their hue encloses.
  'O father, what a hell of witchcraft lies
  In the small orb of one particular tear!
  But with the inundation of the eyes
  Even there resolved my reason into tears;
  In either's aptness, as it best deceives,
  Could scape the hail of his all-hurting aim,
  And, veiled in them, did win whom he would maim.
  Against the thing he sought he would exclaim;
  'Thus merely with the garment of a Grace
  That th' unexperient gave the tempter place,
  Which, like a cherubin, above them hovered.
  Would yet again betray the fore-betrayed,
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Complete Works of William
Produced by World Library, Inc., from their Library of the Future
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     of receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
